ADJUNCT FACULTY HANDBOOK 
AY 2022-2023 
Updated September 2023
Table of Contents 
SCHOOLS, PROGRAMS, AND DEGREES.............................................................................. 3 CIIS MISSION AND COMMITMENTS.................................................................................... 4 PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNITY.............................................................................................. 6 ACADEMICS.......................................................................................................................... 7 CAMPUS FACILITIES............................................................................................................ 8 
Safety and Security..................................................................................................................... 11 Campus Access ........................................................................................................................... 11 Reporting and Response Procedures ......................................................................................... 11 
TECHNOLOGY......................................................................................................................13 ONLINE COURSE PLATFORM .............................................................................................18 ACADEMIC COURSE PREPARATION.................................................................................. 20 SYLLABUS TEMPLATE....................................................................................................... 23 CREDIT HOUR POLICY ....................................................................................................... 26 END OF TERM TASKS ........................................................................................................ 28 TIPS FOR ADJUNCT FACULTY .......................................................................................... 29 ACADEMIC POLICIES ..........................................................................................................31 THE LAURANCE S. ROCKEFELLER LIBRARY .................................................................... 36 OPERATIONS...................................................................................................................... 39 UNIVERSITY POLICIES.......................................................................................................40 TITLE IX POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR GOVERNING STUDENTS AND EMPLOYEES ... 47 HUMAN RESOURCES & ONBOARDING INFORMATION..................................................... 50
2 
SCHOOLS, PROGRAMS, AND DEGREES 
School of Undergraduate Studies 
Interdisciplinary Studies (B.A.)  
Psychology (B.S.)  
School of Professional Psychology and Health 
Applied Psychology (M.A.) 
Clinical Psychology (Psy.D.) 
Counseling Psychology with a concentration in Community Mental Health (M.A.) Counseling Psychology with a concentration in Drama Therapy (M.A.) 
Counseling Psychology with a concentration in Expressive Arts Therapy (M.A.) Counseling Psychology with a concentration in Integral Counseling Psychology (M.A.)  Counseling Psychology with a concentration in Somatic Psychology (M.A.) Integrative Health Studies (M.A.)  
School of Consciousness and Transformation 
Anthropology and Social Change (M.A. and Ph.D.) 
East-West Psychology (M.A. and Ph.D.)  
East-West Psychology with a concentration in Asian Contemplative and Transcultural Studies  (M.A.) 
East-West Spiritual Counseling (Certificate) 
Eco-Resilience Leadership (Certificate) 
Human Sexuality (Ph.D.) 
Interdisciplinary Arts and Writing (M.F.A.) 
Integral Ecology (Certificate) 
Philosophy and Religion with a concentration in Ecology, Spirituality, and Religion (M.A. and  Ph.D.) 
Philosophy and Religion with a concentration in Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness  (M.A. and Ph.D.) 
Philosophy and Religion with a concentration in Women’s Spirituality (Ph.D.) Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness (Certificate) 
Psychology with a concentration in Integral and Transpersonal Psychology (Ph.D.) Psychology with a concentration in Somatic Psychology (Ph.D.) 
Transformative Leadership (M.A.) 
Transformative Studies (Ph.D.) 
Women, Gender, Spirituality, and Social Justice (M.A.)
3 
CIIS MISSION AND COMMITMENTS 
California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS) is an internationally recognized leader in  integral education. CIIS has an enrollment of more than 1,500 students pursuing degrees in  more than 25 academic programs in its schools of Consciousness and Transformation,  Professional Psychology and Health, and Undergraduate Studies. In addition, CIIS hosts a  vibrant art exhibition program through The Arts at CIIS and offers a dynamic array of events  through its Public Programs division, including conversations, workshops, continuing  education, and certificate programs. The University provides affordable mental health and  acupuncture services to the San Francisco Bay Area through its eight award-winning clinics.  CIIS is accredited by the WASC Senior College and University Commission (WSCUC). 
Mission 
CIIS facilitates radical transformation through unique and dynamic educational experiences  in the service of self, society, and Earth. We also commit to living our seven cherished  values, and in so doing lay the foundation for a strong and unified community built upon  wisdom, trust, and collective spirit. 
Vision Statement 
CIIS expands the boundaries of traditional degree programs with transdisciplinary, cross cultural, and applied studies utilizing face-to-face, hybrid, and online pedagogical  approaches. Offering a personal learning environment and supportive community, CIIS  provides an excellent multifaceted education for people committed to transforming  themselves, others, and the world. 
The Seven Commitments of CIIS 
The following seven commitments reflect CIIS’ goals in creating its educational programs  and its university community. These commitments are aspirational statements intended to  advance the mission of CIIS. 
1. Embody integral approaches to learning and research.  
CIIS is committed to studies and practices that cross traditional disciplinary  boundaries. We value the intellectual, emotional, spiritual, imaginal, creative,  somatic, and social dimensions of human potential. 
2. Affirm and elevate spirituality. 
The University is committed to studies and practices of multiple spiritual and  wisdom traditions and to their expression and embodiment throughout the  university community. While no one tradition is shared by all, the importance of  the spiritual dimension of life is affirmed. 
3. Advance diversity, equity, inclusion, and social and ecological justice. CIIS strives to reflect the diversity of the world's peoples, cultures, and spiritual  traditions. We embrace traditions that support emancipatory movements such as  feminism, and social and political liberation. 
4. Embrace multiple ways of knowing, learning, and teaching. 
CIIS honors many learning modalities and ways of knowing, providing a rigorous  and transformative education across all learning approaches. 
5. Cultivate innovation and sustainability.
4 
Recognizing that business as usual threatens the integrity of life on Earth and  perpetuates structures of oppression, we strive to generate creative  alternatives leading to a just and flourishing world. 
6. Nurture and support a flourishing and cohesive community. 
CIIS is committed to providing a welcoming community for all people,  recognizing that acceptance is vital to providing an effective, visionary, and  nurturing environment for integral education. 
7. Foster transformative integral governance.  
CIIS strives to create holistic organizational interaction among all members of its  community. This commitment stands as a constant challenge to try new forms,  procedures, criteria, and language that reflects a more progressive and  collaborative decision-making process.
5 
PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNITY 
Step Out Of Your Comfort Zone 
Try on new ideas, concepts, processes, behaviors before automatically rejecting them  because they are different from your experience. 
Participate Fully 
Let go of all the other things you need to be doing and be present in the moment.  Participation looks different for everyone. 
Us “I” statements 
Practice self-focus: pay attention to what you are feeling and thinking. 
OK to disagree 
It’s a necessary part of accepting differences. 
Not OK to blame, shame, attack 
Or discount self or others. Remember that this can happen on a verbal or non-verbal level. 
Intent and Impact 
Be aware that it is possible to have a negative impact on an individual despite best  intentions. 
Check out your assumptions 
Ask questions of yourself and others instead of jumping to conclusions. 
Confidentiality 
Anything said of a personal nature should not be shared without the person’s permission.
6 
ACADEMICS 
Integral Education at CIIS 
Education at CIIS is designed to foster rigorous intellectual development and personal  growth through self-reflection. We believe that teaching and learning are most  effective when they recognize and reflect diverse ways of knowing and connect  difference and similarity. CIIS advances the education of the whole person (body, mind  and spirit) by integrating knowledge of the interior and exterior dimensions of our  lives. 
Committed to building a better and more inclusive world, academic programs  encourage students to pursue inquiry that transcend disciplinary boundaries and  situates their work in communities outside their own. 
Accreditation 
Since 1981, the University has been accredited by the Commission for Senior Colleges  and Universities of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WSCUC). WSCUC’s contact details are as follows: 985 Atlantic Avenue, Suite 100, Alameda, CA 94501; 510.748.9001.
7 
CAMPUS FACILITIES 
CIIS academic programs operate from one main building in San Francisco, all within walking  distance of the cultural centers of the city. Sites of interest nearby include the San Francisco  Main Public Library, the San Francisco Opera, Davies Concert Hall, Yerba Buena Center for  the Arts, the Asian Art Museum, and the city’s main shopping district. 
Hours 
Mission campus hours, when school is in session, are typically Monday to Saturday  8am to 6 pm and Sundays 8am to 5pm when classes or events are scheduled. We are  typically open Monday to Saturday 8am to 6pm during semester breaks and closed  on Sundays. 
Please check Campus Hours on the home page of CIIS Connect. 
You can also get up-to-date information on the hours by calling the Main Reception  desk at 415.575.6100. Below are the regular and semester-break hours. 
Email Welcome@ciis.edu with any questions about campus access. 
If a closed door office is needed, please email the Office of Campus Experience &  Events at OCEE@ciis.edu to make a reservation in advance. 
Building/Location Regular Hours Semester-Break Hours 
Main Campus 
1453 Mission Street
	Mon–Fri 8 a.m.–6p.m. p.m. (8a.m.-8p.m. when  evening classes are scheduled) Sat 8a.m.-6p.m. (8a.m.- 8p.m. when evening classes are scheduled)  
Sun When classes or  events are scheduled 
	Mon–Fri 8 a.m.–6 p.m.  Sat/Sun-when classes or  events are scheduled
	



Art Galleries 
1453 Mission Street, Desai | Matta Gallery in the 1st floor lobby, the second, third and  fourth floor corridors, as well as the 3rd floor café. Works from our collection can be  found throughout campus in classrooms, offices, and in-between spaces. The Arts at CIIS maintains an active program of exhibitions each year, making visible  a diverse array of voices grappling with today’s urgent social, ecological, and  aesthetic questions. The Arts at CIIS promotes dialogue across disciplines, and within  and between communities, about the arts, visual culture, and social change. 
THE ARTS AT CIIS SEEKS TO SUPPORT ART WORKS THAT: 
• are research-based, process-oriented, risk-taking, and critical in nature. • promote pluralism and a complex understanding of our distinct and  overlapping histories.
8 
• pose critical questions informed by a deep engagement with context, from the  local to the international. 
• advance resilient and interdependent communities. 
• are created by emerging artists while presenting a platform for  intergenerational dialogue. 
• are in critical dialogue with the history of CIIS, informing and rendering more  complex our understanding of that history in the present day. 
• foster integral and interdisciplinary connections with the CIIS community and  academic curriculum. 
Counseling Centers 
The Institute has six counseling centers in San Francisco that serve as professional  training facilities for students and as community service agencies for the public. 
Integral Counseling Centers 
Associated with the Integral Counseling Psychology program, therapists here take an  integral approach to healing that recognizes the interrelationships among mind, body,  and spirit. 
• Church Street Center, 1782 Church Street, 415.648.2644 
• Golden Gate Counseling Center, 507 Polk Street, Suite 440, 415.561.0230 • Pierce Street Center, 2140 Pierce Street, 415.776.3109 
Somatic Psychology Counseling Center 
Associated with the Somatic Psychology program, this center offers the  community affordable psychotherapy based on body-oriented approaches  integrated with other therapeutic modalities. Address: 312 Sutter Street,  Suite 410, 415.271.8895, 415.558.0880 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Program 
Associated with the Doctor of Psychology program, the “Psychological Services  Center” provides psychological services and testing while functioning as a training  facility for advanced students in the Doctor of Psychology program. 
Address: 507 Polk Street, Suite 420 415.346.1011 
Clinic Without Walls 
Associated with the Community Mental Health program, this clinic uses a  wellness model where psychotherapy is part of a broad approach that includes  linking the clients to resources to help with nutrition, parenting, exercise,  transportation, and other needs. 
Sri Aurobindo Meditation Room (Second floor, Room 212) 
The Sri Aurobindo Meditation Room, a space initiated by students, is dedicated for silent  meditation, prayer, and contemplation. This room is open during all open hours of operation  and is available to all current students. No shoes, beverages, or food are allowed in the  Meditation Room. 
Student Breakroom (Fifth floor, Room 548) 
The Student Break Room is an inviting space for students to eat, relax, converse, or  study. The room is equipped with a refrigerator, a microwave, and a sink for storing  and preparing your food. All food stored in the Student Break Room must be labeled 
9 
with your name and an expiration date. 
4th Floor Staff/Faculty Lounge (4th floor, Room 424) 
The Faculty/Staff Lounge was just recently renovated and is a space for faculty and staff to  gather, eat and relax. It is fully equipped with a refrigerator, microwave, toaster oven, tea  kettle, water filter and sink with garbage disposal.
10 
CAMPUS SECURITY 
Safety and Security 
It is the policy of California Institute of Integral Studies to prevent, respond to, and  defuse any incident with the best available care and precaution. To help create a  safe environment, CIIS encourages students, employees, and guests to be aware of  its policies, to be responsible for their own safety and the safety of others, and to  report any crime or suspicious activity immediately to the ground-floor lobby  Security Desk, or anyone at the Main Reception desk on the fourth floor (Mission  Campus). 
The Facilities Department oversees our security procedures/policies and works  closely with the Student Affairs and Human Resource Offices to ensure that these  operations are monitored, maintained, and enforced equally. A security officer is on  duty during all hours of operation. 
Campus Access 
See “Campus Facilities” above for current information about access to the building. 
CIIS issues photo identity cards to current students, faculty, and staff. This card  is produced by the Registrar’s Office (Room 405). ID cards are not transferable.  Everyone, upon entering the campus, is required to either present a valid CIIS ID  card or be signed in using a government-issued photo ID. 
Student IDs are considered invalid without a current sticker. Anyone on campus must  carry their CIIS ID and be prepared to present it when asked by CIIS personnel. 
Reporting and Response Procedures 
Any member of the CIIS community who experiences or witnesses an incident that  is threatening or dangerous should immediately dial “911” (9+911 from any campus  phone) to reach San Francisco emergency response services. For non-life threatening disruptions or emergencies, we encourage you to contact at least one  of the following: 
• The receptionist in the fourth-floor reception area 
• Any member of the Facilities Department team 
• Any other CIIS employee, including all staff and faculty 
After contacting emergency services, call the CIIS Security officer at 415.575.6101 (or ext.  6101 from any campus phone) so that they are aware of the situation and can assist. 
Crime Survey 
The University is committed to timely reports to the University community of any  crimes that were reported or known to have occurred at any of its locations. The  Student Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act was passed by Congress in 1990 in  response to concerns about crime and security at postsecondary institutions. This  Act requires institutions participating in student financial aid programs under Title  IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 to disclose information about campus safety  policies and procedures and to provide statistical information concerning whether  certain crimes took place on campus. The Dean of Students and the Director of  Operations are responsible for collecting crime statistics, with cooperation from the 
11 
San Francisco Police Department.  
Emergency Notifications 
The e2campus system is used to provide timely emergency notifications to students.  This system utilizes email, text, and phone calls to alert students to emergencies  such as campus closures, power outages, and emergency situations. Students provide  their appropriate contact information for these emergency announcements through  the Personal Contact Information Update Form when they register and/or look at  their class schedules each semester. 
CIIS is all within walking distance of the cultural centers of the city. Sites of interest  nearby include the San Francisco Main Public Library, the San Francisco Opera,  Davies Concert Hall, Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, the Asian Art Museum, and the  city’s main shopping district.
12 
TECHNOLOGY 
CIIS Email Policy 
CIIS Email accounts are assigned to adjunct faculty after a member from the Provost Division  has approved them for teaching. If you have any questions about your CIIS.edu email account,  please email support@uswired.com    
University systems require your university email address and email password to access. The  university utilizes single-sign one for user convenience and multi-factor authentication (MFA)  for system security. Users will be prompted to set-up email recovery options and MFA when  they first log-in to their university email. 
CIIS will communicate with you through your university email account (name@ciis.edu). You  are expected to 1) check it regularly; 2) correspond with CIIS through it; and 3) not share your  password. This assures that you, and only you, receive the emails we send, and that the  emails we receive are coming from you, and not someone posing as you. This both keeps you  apprised of important information and helps protect your information and identity.    
CIIS students are expected to communicate with you through their CIIS account  (name@MyMail.ciis.edu) and you are expected to communicate with them using their CIIS  account and your CIIS account. 
   
The university email account is on the Outlook platform and is part of a suite of free  Microsoft Office 365 applications now available to you such as Word, Excel, and PowerPoint,  and storage on One Drive. These are all cloud-based and are accessible through a web  browser. It is the only email account that CIIS requires that you use. 
CIIS owns these email accounts and reserves the right to lock or purge them for faculty who  violate the university policies found in this handbook. 
To access your account, log in to https://outlook.office365.com and use the following: • Email Address/Username: XXXXX 
• Temporary Password: XXXX 
• During your first login, you will be prompted by Microsoft to create a new password  and to setup your password recovery questions and answers, as well as install the  required Microsoft Authenticator app to enable multi-factor authentication (see below  for more details) 
• If you need assistance with logging in, email support@uswired.com. 
Canvas 
For assistance with the Learning Management Platform (Canvas), contact  OnlineLearningSupport@ciis.edu. 
   
Wireless Internet Access 
At the CIIS Main Campus on Mission Street, Adjunct Faculty connect to CIIS.WIFI6 and enter  the passcode wifi4facultystaff. You will then be prompted to enter your CIIS email address  and your CIIS email password. 
   
Photocopy Code
13 
Discuss your semester teaching needs with your Program/Department Chair and  Coordinator/Manager. They can provide you with a photocopy code. 
   
CIIS Identification 
All adjunct faculty must obtain a CIIS-issued identification card. CIIS-issued identification is  required for entry into CIIS buildings at all times. If you are not in possession of your CIIS ID,  you may present any government-issued photo ID (such as a driver’s license) and will need to  sign in. If you have no photo ID, you will not be allowed to enter the building. Limiting entry  to those who can verify that they are students, faculty members, staff and guests with  legitimate business, follows our security policy. 
   
Email the Registrar’s Office (registrar@ciis.edu) to make an appointment to obtain a CIIS ID.  Please bring a government-issued photo ID with you for verification. 
Multi-Factor Authentication 
CIIS requires all students, core and adjunct faculty, and staff to download the Microsoft  Authenticator app. This multi-factor authentication (MFA) process helps ensure the security  of both your own identity and the community’s information and data. You must use the  Microsoft Authenticator app, another MFA application will not be accepted. Follow the steps below to enable MFA using the Microsoft Authenticator app. 
Step 1. Install the Microsoft Authenticator app on your smartphone or Wi-Fi equipped tablet  a. For Android users: Microsoft Authenticator on Google Play Store 
b. For Apple users: Microsoft Authenticator on iOS App Store 
Please ensure that you are downloading the correct app. Microsoft Authenticator will never  ask you to pay a fee at any time. Apple users please note, the iOS App Store allows for  advertisements to be placed as the first search result. To ensure that you are downloading  the correct app, verify that the app is not listed as an ad and that the app has the correct  name “Microsoft Authenticator” and icon as shown.   
  
  
Android Apple 
Step 2. Log in on your computer 
a) On your computer, open an internet browser and go to office.com  
(https://www.office.com/).   
b) Log-in with your CIIS email address and email password. 
c) Select Next on the screen that informs you “More information is needed.” d) Select the button Receive notifications for verification. 
e) Your screen will now display a QR code. 
14 
  

Step 3. Scan QR Code 
a) Open the Microsoft Authenticator app on your device. Accept notifications, etc.  until you arrive at the screen “Add your first account.” 
  
  
b. Select add Work or school account 
c. Select Scan QR code 
d. Scan the QR code with the Authenticator app 
e. Your CIIS account should now be visible on your Authenticator app home screen 
Please note, if after scanning the QR code, you receive the message “QR code has been used  before,” select Next. 
Step 4. Approve notification on your device 
a. Select Next on your computer. 
b. Microsoft will send a test notification to the app on your device. 
c. Enter the number displayed on your computer into the notification entry box. d. Select “Approve” on the notification to complete MFA set-up.
15 
  

Step 6. Set up Password Recovery 
a. Once the request has been approved, select Next on your computer. b. You will now be asked to input a phone number that can receive SMS Text  Message notifications. 
c. Select Next. 
d. You will receive a 6-digit code sent to the phone number listed. 
e. Enter that code into the field in your computer and select Next. 
  

Step 7. Final Approval 
a. You should now see a screen listing all of your multifactor authentication  methods. 
b. Select Done.
16 
MFA has been successfully installed! 
If you encounter any issues, or require additional support, please reach out to dot@ciis.edu
17 
ONLINE COURSE PLATFORM 
Canvas is the University’s Learning Management System (LMS) Log-in with your  university email address and email password here: https://ciis.instructure.com/ 
Find updated information and resources on Online Learning’s Knowledgebase: CIIS  Knowledgebase – Online Learning Support (vclhub.com) 
Access live chat support for virtual course meetings here: www.vclhub.com 
Canvas Course Spaces 
All academic courses (e.g., face-to-face, blended/hybrid, online) at CIIS have an  associated Canvas Learning Management System (LMS) virtual, online course  space accessible at ciis.instructure.com 
Pandemic response virtual instruction modality format  
information: Virtualized and Hybrid Courses – CIIS  
Knowledgebase (vclhub.com) 
Enrollment in a Canvas Course Space 
A faculty member is enrolled in a Canvas course space(s) once they have been  assigned to teach a course(s) in the student information system; a student is  enrolled in a Canvas course space(s) once they have successfully registered for  their first academic course(s) (no enrollment holds). Enrollment in Canvas course  spaces is done by an automated process between the University’s student  information system and Canvas that can take up to 24 hours from the time a  faculty member is assigned to a course or a student successfully registers for their  first academic course. 
Canvas Course Space Access 
Canvas course spaces are made accessible to students by faculty. Once made  accessible, full course space functionality is available from 14 days prior to the start  of a course’s term. 
All Canvas course spaces conclude on the day that grades are due for a term and  faculty and students maintain access to concluded Canvas course spaces indefinitely  in a read-only format (refer to the CIIS academic calendar for specific term dates).  The read-only format of concluded courses allows faculty and students to return to  a concluded Canvas course space(s) at any time in the future from the CIIS Canvas  website (ciis.instructure.com) to download course materials and past assignment  submissions. 
Special Circumstances (Incompletes) 
Students who are granted an incomplete for a course may be provided temporary access to a Canvas course space after it has been concluded only to submit an  assignment(s) through the Canvas assignment feature. Email onlinelearning@ciis.edu  for information after an incomplete has been granted for a course if the student needs  to access Canvas to submit an assignment. 
Special Access and Policy 
Access to a Canvas course space(s) is guided by FERPA and policies established by the  Human Resources, Provost, and Registrar’s offices. All access to Canvas course spaces  outside of established policies must originate as a registration record in the University’s 
18 
student information system or upon approval of the Human Resources office. This  includes any access by auditors, resident scholars, visiting scholars, teaching assistants,  guest lecturers, and all other individuals not enrolled in a Canvas course space via the  University’s student information system. 
Privacy 
The CIIS Canvas website is not public and is not in any way searchable externally. All  communication (through the Canvas grade feature) between a student and a faculty  member is private, as is all content of any submitted assignment (through the  Canvas assignment feature). 
Grades 
The Canvas gradebook is an LMS feature that allows an instructor to provide feedback on  an assignment(s) and for a student and instructor to privately communicate about a  student’s submitted academic work in Canvas. The Canvas gradebook feature may include  letter grades and a final grade for a course(s); however, a student’s official grade for any  course (as it appears on the student’s official University transcript) is viewable only on the  Colleague Self-Service. 
International faculty and students 
The CIIS Canvas website, ciis.instructure.com, is expected to be accessible  anywhere with an internet connection. If you experience an inability to connect to  CIIS Canvas from outside of the United States, please email onlinelearning@ciis.edu for support. For up-to-date Canvas Internet browser compatibility information, visit: What are Canvas browser and computer requirements - (canvaslms.com) 
For further information, contact: 
Ben Cline-Suzuki, Dean of Information Technology  
bcline@ciis.edu 
Sabine Mihalovich, IT Services Manager 
smihalovich@ciis.edu  
Corinne Ewan, Application Support Engineer 
cewan@ciis.edu 
Jessica Gunther, Instructional Designer/Virtual Course Manager 
jgunther@ciis.edu 
Allan Neoh, SharePoint and Microsoft 365 SME 
aneoh@ciis.edu 
Tyler Daneman, Technology Coordinator 
tdaneman@ciis.edu 
Helpdesk 
support@uswired.com
19 
ACADEMIC COURSE PREPARATION 
Course Packet 
About six weeks prior to teaching, faculty receive at their CIIS faculty email address  a “Course Packet” which includes required forms and the timeline for handing in the  forms. Completing the forms on time is essential in order for the Institute staff to be  able to: 
• assign classroom space 
• order text books 
• ensure syllabi are consistent with CIIS standards 
• secure necessary library materials for your students 
• receive timely payments 
Form 1. Course Day and Time Request 
This form asks for your preferred teaching times and dates. It asks you to make two  requests. Please do so, as it is not always possible to fulfill the first or, sometimes,  even the second. 
Grading System 
Departments/Programs determine the type of grade to be assigned for each course  to assess student performance: A letter grade; a Pass/No Pass (P/NP); or Student  Option (OP), meaning the student may select either a letter grade or a pass/no pass  grade. To see which grading option your course is, view the CIIS Catalog, available  on the CIIS website: https://www.ciis.edu/academics/academic-catalog 
IMPORTANT: CIIS policy states that “P” is equivalent to “C” (not “C-“) or higher for undergraduate students; “B” (not “B-“) or higher for graduate students. “NP” is  equivalent to “C-“ or lower for undergraduate students; “B-“ or lower for  graduate students. 
Form 2. Course Description & Syllabus Outline 
This form asks for details regarding the class you will be teaching as well as a  week-by-week topic description. 
Form 3. Library Reserve Form 
This gives information about how to reserve books or materials for your course,  including how to place your own materials in the Library for your students. 
Class Lists 
Class Lists are electronically accessible on the Faculty tab in Self-Service.  
View your Class List prior to your first class meeting, again after the Add/Drop deadline,  and then again throughout the semester if students add or drop. If you have students in  your class that do not appear on the class list, do not allow them to remain in the class and immediately direct them to the Registrar’s Office. If there are students on the class  list that are absent without your permission, e-mail the names of those students to  registrar@ciis.edu BY THE ADD/DROP DEADLINE and they will be dropped. Additional  questions or issues should be addressed to the Registrar’s Office, 415.575.6126.
20 
Library Reserves 
Each semester, instructors are encouraged to use the wealth of CIIS Library resources  when adopting course readings, and linking to the resources in their syllabus. 
Faculty may also place books, e-books, videos, and streaming videos on Course Reserve for  their class. This service is designed to ensure that students have easier and more equitable  access to the materials. It can also help to save students money on required readings! 
The CIIS Library can make required course readings available to students including: • Providing links to resources (e-books and streaming video) the CIIS Library owns or  has access to that you can add to your syllabus or Canvas 
• Purchase of course-required books, e-books, video, and streaming video that the  CIIS Library does not have access to (depending on collection criteria, availability,  and budget) 
• Physical items on reserve shelves (where feasible) 
Instructors can submit a Library Course Reserves Request Form in which they will list the  required material for their class. The Library will then work to process the request and  build a course-specific listing in our Library Catalog.  
• Please submit course reserve requests before the start of every semester • Up to 12 items may be placed on reserve for a class if they are required course  materials 
• Print copies of reserve books may be checked-out and read in the library for up to  2 hours 
• Physical A/V materials must be viewed in the Library, or have pre-arranged class  showing dates 
• A course-specific reserves page for each class can be found in the Course Reserves Listings in our Library Catalog 
For more detailed information please visit: https://library.ciis.edu/reserves/faqs Items not eligible to be put on reserve: 
• Copies of video or audio tapes, CDs or DVDs 
• Photocopies of book chapters or articles 
• Course packets or readers 
Requests can take up to two weeks to process, perhaps longer if we need to purchase  items. Although we recommend submitting your requests as early as possible, we accept  requests anytime. 
Please note - Course Reserve requests expire at the end of the semester. We recommend  filling out a new form before the start of every new semester so we can provide students  with the most up to date and accurate information! 
Course Textbooks and Readers 
Please remember to adopt any required textbooks for your courses by logging  into the CIIS online bookstore.
21 
Bookstore 
CIIS partnered with Akademos to host an online bookstore for our students. Prior to each  semester, faculty are expected to log-in to the online bookstore (using their MyCIIS  credentials) and adopt their course(s) required and optional textbooks. Akademos has  great prices, offers used and rental options for some texts, and has an inventory akin to  Amazon and other major outlets. Faculty can also create 
“coursepacks” (course readers) by uploading a PDF of the selected readings, which  Akademos will then secure copyright permissions for and collect into electronic and/or  print form for students to purchase. Please see the Faculty User Guide for further  instructions about how to adopt textbooks and navigate the bookstore website. 
The faculty adoption deadlines are typically 4 weeks prior to the beginning of each  semester and are listed in the schedule included in this packet. Please note that even if  your course(s) do not require textbooks, you must still log-in and select “no textbooks  required” and submit. Thank you for your efforts to ensure that CIIS’s faculty textbook  adoption rate is high and on time, which is crucial both for student success and for CIIS  to avoid breach of contract with Akademos. 
You will find a link to the online bookstore here: https://ciis.textbookx.com/ If you are  already signed into CIIS Connect, you should also be automatically signed into the  textbook website after clicking on the link. The course(s) you are teaching should be  listed. A tutorial video can be found here: https://youtu.be/SQvDDYJtwXQ
22 
SYLLABUS TEMPLATE  
Use this form as a guide in creating the syllabus for your course. Your syllabus may have a  different arrangement or format, but it must contain all of the information below unless  specifically noted as optional. 
Instructors are to post syllabi on Canvas, CIIS’s online learning management system, and can  do this as soon as the course has been built into the class schedule. Submit the syllabus to  the program coordinator two weeks before you post it, however, for the program to review it.  We recommend it be posted to Canvas six weeks before the term begins, and require it be  posted at least one week before. For assistance, contact CIIS’ Office of Online Learning at  onlinelearning@ciis.edu.  
COURSE INFORMATION 
Course Title: 
Course Number: 
Credit Hours: 
Grade Option: - this is determined by the program; see the Catalog 
Semester: 
Meeting Times and Days: 
Class Location: 
Online Component (if any): 
Special Events or Retreats: 
INSTRUCTOR 
  

Full Name/Title: 
Telephone Number: 
Office Location: 
Office Hours: 
Email Address: 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
  

Short description of the course, either from the course catalog or created by you. What are  the big questions the course will address? How does the course connect to the curriculum? 
COURSE GOALS (OPTIONAL) 
A statement or list of what you hope to accomplish in this course. 
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 
  

Four to eight statements of what the student should expect to know or be able to do by the  end of the course. Student learning outcomes need to be concise, teachable and assessable.  They form the foundation of the course design. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7.
23 
8. 
Student  Learning  Outcome
	PLOs DLOs 
	

	ILOs 
	Learning Hierarchy  (Bloom’s Taxonomy)
	Summative  Assignment
	Summative  Assessment  Method
	1
	 
	

	

	Understanding,  
Applying, Analyzing,  and Evaluating
	Weekly  
Canvas  
discussions
	Discussion  
Forum Rubric
	2
	 
	

	

	Understanding,  
Applying, Analyzing,  Evaluating, and  
Creating
	Weekly  
Canvas  
Discussions,  Small Group  Presentations
	Discussion  
Forum Rubric; Group  
Presentation  Rubric
	3
	 
	

	

	

	

	

	4
	 
	

	

	

	

	

	5
	 
	

	

	

	

	

	6
	 
	

	

	

	

	

	



 
COURSE TEXT AND MATERIALS 
  

List required books and readings. 
COURSE ASSESSMENT MEASURES 
  

Specify how student learning will be assessed in the course, the weighting of the various  assessments, and the due dates. If a paper is required, indicate the format to be used (e.g.,  ALA, Chicago, MLA); each program has a specified format. 
COURSE CALENDAR 
  

This is a week-by-week list of topics to be covered, materials to be read, special events and  due dates for assignments. While the course calendar is required, instructors can signal that the plan is subject to change. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY (OPTIONAL) 
  

List suggested readings for research or greater depth in the subject matter. 
RELEVANT POLICIES 

It is strongly recommended that these policies be discussed with the students at the first  class meeting. These are Institute policies and, as such, cannot be overridden by a program  or instructor. You or your program may, however, enforce stricter versions of these policies.  If so, then include those versions in your syllabus. 
Class Attendance Policy 
Students are expected to attend all class meetings regularly and punctually. Students are  assigned an F (Failure) or NP (No Pass) grade if they are absent for more than 20 percent of a  course. This maximum includes both excused and unexcused absences. Three instances of  tardiness or leaving early are considered equivalent to one absence. Instructors may permit a 
24 
student to deviate from this rule on the grounds of illness necessitating confinement for 24  hours or more, a death in the family, or other extreme emergencies. The instructor may  request verification of these circumstances by a letter from a medical professional, the Dean  of Students, and OSAS as appropriate. Due to the nature of some courses, individual  programs, departments, and instructors may enforce stricter policies than these. Check the  program handbook and/or the syllabus of a course to see these policies. 
Academic Integrity 
Creative and original scholarly research is at the heart of the Institute’s academic purpose. It  is essential that faculty and students pursue their academic work with the utmost integrity.  This means that all academic work produced by an individual is the result of the individual’s  efforts and that those efforts acknowledge explicitly any contribution by another person.  Reproducing another’s work and submitting it as one’s work without acknowledging the  source is called “plagiarism,” or stealing the intellectual property of another, which is the  antithesis of scholarly research. Any use of other ideas or others’ expression in any medium  without attribution is a serious violation of academic standards. If confirmed, plagiarism  subjects a student to disciplinary action. 
Policy on Incompletes (you or your program have the right to not allow incompletes) Students anticipating being unable to complete a course may request permission from the  instructor to receive an “I” (Incomplete) grade; students who have not completed the work  required for a course are not to be given a passing grade in the course without completing  the required work. CIIS courses are expected to be organized in a way that allows work to be  completed during the semester the course is being offered. Below are the policies related to  incomplete grades: 
Permission to be given an “I” grade is given only in the following circumstances: 1. medical reasons documented by a health-care professional; 
2. family emergency verified with supporting documentation; or 
3. decision by faculty member based on exceptional pedagogical reasons. The instructor has the right to refuse to grant an “I” grade. 
The Registrar’s Office does not record an “I” grade without receiving an Incomplete Grade  
Request Form signed by the student and the instructor by the grade submission deadline.  This form stipulates what coursework is remaining and its due date. 
The instructor, not the student, determines the deadline for the remaining coursework. This  deadline cannot exceed two semesters (including summer) from the last day of the semester  in which the course took place and can be earlier. (For example, if the course is in fall 2011,  the student has until the last day of summer 2012 to submit the work unless the instructor  specifies an earlier deadline.) The maximum deadline for an Incomplete given for exceptional  pedagogical reasons is one semester. This deadline is not extended for students who are on  a leave of absence, become inactive, or refrain from registering for any semester while the  work remains outstanding. 
If the student does not submit the coursework by this deadline, the “I” grade converts to an  “IN” (Permanent Incomplete). An “IN” is irreversible. 
Students may not graduate with an “I” grade on their record even in an elective course.  Students may graduate with an “IN” grade on their record, provided that if the IN was for a  required course, the student later successfully repeated the course.
25 
The submission of an “I” grade by an instructor does not imply that that instructor will be a  CIIS employee in a subsequent semester. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain current  contact information for this instructor. 
Students may not sit in on a subsequent semester’s offering of the same course in order to  make up the coursework. 
When submitting the remaining coursework, the student must include a signed Grade Change  Form. The instructor uses this form to notify the Registrar’s Office of the final grade. 
Credit Hour Policy 
Unit of Credit Policy 
At California Institute of Integral Studies, one credit hour is defined as a minimum of three  hours of work by an average student for a 15- week semester (i.e., 45 hours for a full  semester). That work is to be supervised by an instructor, represented in intended learning  outcomes, and verified by evidence of student achievement. An hour of direct faculty  instruction is defined as 50 minutes of classroom time. 
CIIS' definition of a credit hour is consistent with federal regulation (CFR sect ion 600.2),  which defines a credit hour as “an amount of work represented in intended learning  outcomes and verified by evidence of student achievement that is an institutionally  established equivalency that reasonably approximates not less than one hour of classroom  or direct faculty instruction and a minimum of two hours of out -of- class student work each  week for approximately fifteen weeks for one semester or trimester hour of credit, or ten to  twelve weeks for one quarter hour of credit, or the equivalent amount of work over a  different amount of time, or at least an equivalent amount of work as required in paragraph  (1) of this definition above for other academic activities as established by the institution  including laboratory work, internships, practica, studio work, and other academic work  leading to the award of credit hours.  
This work can be fulfilled in a variety of ways, including but not limited to direct faculty  instruction and systematic outside reading; research under the supervision of an instructor;  studio, field, clinical, or laboratory work; and internships, service learning, or directed study.  One credit hour would be granted for specific types of courses as follows (this list is not intended to be exhaustive): 
1) At least 15 contact hours of lecture, discussion, or seminar, as well as a minimum of 30  hours of student work outside the class, are required for each unit of student credit. 2) For courses in which classroom time does not apply (e.g., online or hybrid courses), one  
hour of direct faculty instruction is expected each week along with two hours of  additional student work each week. 
3) For courses wholly occupied with studio, field, clinical, or laboratory work, internships,  service learning, or directed study, the amount of student ·work for the semester should  constitute45hours for a 15- week semester, supervised by an instructor. 
4) For courses in which direct faculty instruct ion is less than 50 minutes per week but is  supplemented with additional student work (e.g., outside reading, directed research or  projects, or experiments) so that the total is at least 45 hours for a 15-weeksemester. 
5) For courses offered in fewer than 15 weeks, the same number of total hours must be  completed as during the standard 15- week semester (i.e., 45 hours of combined direct  faculty instruction plus student work per unit). 
6) For workshops that have at least 15 contact hours and sufficient student work outside  the workshop to make up a total of at least 45 hours of work.
26 
It is understood that the hour requirements specified above represent minimums for average  students and that considerable deviation in excess of these requirements may occur,  particularly at the graduate level.  
Exception to This Definition 
The following academic requirements have unit assignments that are distinct from this  definition: 
Clinical Practicum (2 or 3 units per semester, classified as half- time enrollment); Internship  (1 unit full-time, or 0.5 unit half-time); Comprehensive Examinations (3units, full- time);  Dissertation Proposal Writing/Completion (0.1 unit, full-time); and Dissertation Seminar (0  unit, full-time).  
Disability Accommodations 
CIIS is committed to equal access for students with disabilities. In accordance with Section  504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act, CIIS will not  discriminate against qualified students with disabilities on the basis of disability in the  programs and services provided to all students. Students with disabilities may register with  the CIIS Office of Student Accessibility Services by providing documentation of disability  status from an appropriate provider. The Office of Student Accessibility Services will then  work with the student to identify areas for reasonable accommodation that will provide the  student with the opportunity for access and participation in the academic environment. If  you would like to request accommodations related to a disability, please contact  sds@ciis.edu to register with CIIS Office of Student Accessibility Services. 
Statement on Diversity 
This statement is program-specific. It is within either the program’s or the instructor’s discretions to include it on the syllabus.
27 
END OF TERM TASKS 
Course Evaluations 
Course evaluations are emailed to students directly on the last day of each course.  Instructors will also receive an email allowing them to track student response rates. After  grades have been submitted, instructors will receive another email allowing them to view  evaluation results.  
Please ensure your course end-dates are correct in the Schedule of Classes to ensure  that students receive your evaluations on time. For any changes in end-date, please  notify the registrar and your program coordinator immediately.  
  
For questions or  
assistance about  
evaluations, Contact:
	Jessica McGuire 
jmcguire@ciis.edu
	



Submitting Grades 
Instructors are expected to submit all grades online through Self-Service. Submission  instructions can be found at this link: 
https://support.vclhub.com/knowledge-base/self-service-submitting-final-grades/ 
If your program permits it, you may grant a student extra time to finish the course if they  experienced either an extenuating personal or pedagogical circumstance (e.g., an assignment  was fundamentally misunderstood). Direct the student to submit to you the Incomplete  Grade Request form. The Office of the Registrar’s will not record an “I” [Incomplete] grade  without receiving this form from you – not the student – by the grade submission deadline. 
Per the Class Attendance Policy, students who miss 20% or more of a course, including  excused and unexcused absences, fail the course. 
A ‘W” grade is not an option to submit. Students have until the last day of a course to  withdraw from it, which requires them to submit the Registration Form to you for your  signature. 
Adjunct faculty do not receive their final paycheck until all grades have been recorded.
For Technical Help, Contact: 
	Web Portal Administrator 
support@uswired.com
	



28 
TIPS FOR ADJUNCT FACULTY 
□ COURSE PACKET 
For each of your courses, complete and return the Course Packet to both your  Program Coordinator and the Assistant Registrar if you have not already done so.  Typically, this is completed up to 6 months in advance of your course. 
□ CLASS SYLLABUS 
Submit your syllabus to your program coordinator for approval; once approved, post  it on Canvas. 
All programs/departments post their syllabi on their Canvas class space. Step by-step information about how to do this is available from either your Program  Coordinator or by onlinelearning@ciis.edu. 
□ TEXTBOOK ORDERING 
Instructions for choosing textbooks and course materials via the Akademos website  will be emailed to 
adjunct faculty. 
□ LIBRARY RESERVES 
While physical reserves are available, electronic reserves are no longer available. Library staff can assist in creating links to electronic resources for use in syllabi. 
□ CIIS EMAIL 
New adjunct faculty receive a CIIS email. If you are a returning adjunct and do not  already have a CIIS 
email address, you can request one by emailing support@uswired.com 
□ MID-SEMESTER REVIEW 
Adjunct faculty are encouraged to conduct their own informal mid-semester review  with their students. 
Typically, this involves choosing a student to facilitate a 15 minute discussion with  the class while the instructor waits outside the room. The student facilitator would  then welcome the instructor back into the room to share a summary of the student  feedback. The goal of this informal mid-semester review is to provide the  instructor with feedback while the course is still underway, thereby allowing for  changes in format, etc., during the second half of the semester. 
□ CLASS LIST 
Download your class list from Faculty tab in Self-Service: 
1. On the day your course first meets and 
2. On the day after the Add/Drop deadline 
If there are any discrepancies between the list(s) and the attendees,  immediately send an e-mail to registrar@ciis.edu
29 
AS EACH COURSE ENDS: 
□ COURSE EVALUATIONS 
• Students will receive an email with a link to complete an online evaluation  following the final class 
meeting of the semester. Instructors will receive an email allowing them to track  their students’ response rate, and a second email with the evaluation results once  grades have been submitted. 
□ GRADES 
Submit grades online through Self-Service. Grades are due ten business days after the final class meeting. 
Please note, the Office of Student Accounts issues an instructor’s final payment only after the Registrar’s Office confirms that all of their grades are submitted. Issuance of final payment generally takes ten business days. Evaluation results are also not returned until after grades have been submitted.
30 
ACADEMIC POLICIES 
Canceled Courses 
While CIIS makes every effort to plan semester schedules to accurately meet the demand  for courses, it does happen that enrollments into certain courses fall short of projection.  With some exceptions, if a course taught by one instructor has fewer than nine students  registered in it by the Late Registration Deadline, it is canceled. A course taught by two  instructors must have 12 students. (Two auditors are equivalent to one student.) Course cancellation decisions are made between the semester’s Late Registration Deadline and  the Add/Drop Deadline. Faculty are given a $100 honorarium for the time dedicated for  course preparation. 
Class Attendance Policy 
Students are expected to attend all class meetings regularly and punctually. Students are  assigned an F (Failure) or NP (No Pass) grade if they are absent for more than 20 percent  of a course. This maximum includes both excused and unexcused absences. Three  instances of tardiness or leaving early are considered equivalent to one absence.  Instructors may permit a student to deviate from this rule on the grounds of illness  necessitating confinement for 24 hours or more, a death in the family, or other extreme emergencies. The instructor may request verification of these circumstances by a letter  from a medical professional, the Dean of Students, or OSAS as appropriate. Due to the  nature of some courses, individual programs, departments, and instructors may enforce  stricter policies than these. Check the program handbook and/or the syllabus of a course  to see these policies. 
Grade and Coursework Evaluation Deadlines 
All instructors and teaching assistants are to return assignments back to students  with written comments by the following deadlines: 
Feedback Deadline 
Comments on mid-semester assignment 
	Three weeks
	Comments on final academic project 
	Three weeks
	Comments on thesis/dissertation proposals or  chapters
	Three weeks*
	Grade 
	Ten business days after course  ends
	



* During the summer semester, the student and the thesis/dissertation chair and committee members are to agree upon the feedback deadline. Faculty are to be available by email, by phone, or in person if possible. 
Written Feedback on Papers and Research Documents 
It is expected that a faculty member will return tests and required papers to students  within three weeks 
with appropriate comment and/or grade and will meet Institute grade deadlines. 
CIIS programs do not store graded papers or supply students with mailboxes. In lieu of  this, CIIS will pay for the postage required to mail students back their final papers.
31 
Please tell your students that if they do not supply you with a self-addressed envelope  when they submit their final paper, their papers will not be returned to them. After  grading the paper, put it in the envelope, seal it, and give it to your program coordinator  who will mail it. 
Mid-semester assignments are returned to students within three weeks of receipt,  provided that the student has met the deadline for submission of the assignment. 
All written assignments receive written comments by the instructor and/or teaching  assistant. Thesis and dissertation proposals and chapters are returned to the student  with written comments within three weeks of receipt of the document. During the  summer semester, the research student, chairperson, and committee members will  agree upon the feedback turn-around time. Faculty will be available to their students  by e- mail, phone, or in person. 
Grade Changes and Appeal Procedure 
Grading requires the instructor to evaluate a student’s academic performance both  objectively and subjectively. CIIS assumes that this evaluation has integrity and requires a  student appealing the grade to supply evidence that the instructor made an error or was  biased. Students may appeal a Fall or Summer grade no later than the last day of the  following semester; a Spring grade, no later than the last day of the following Fall semester.  The appeals process is completed by the end of the semester following the one in which the  appeal was filed (excluding Summer). Procedure: 
Students should address a concern about a grade to the instructor. Normally, grade appeals  are resolved in the following way: 
• If the instructor agrees to change the grade, the student submits the Grade  Change form to the instructor, who should submit it to the  
department/program chair along with an explanation of the reasons for the  change. If the chair approves of the change, they sign the form and submit it  and the explanation to the vice provost, who is the chair of the Academic  Standards Committee (ASC). If the vice provost approves of the change, the  Office of the Registrar is notified, processes the change, and notifies the  student, instructor, and chair. The registrar notifies the student, the  
instructor, and the chair of the vice provost’s decision either way. 
• If the instructor does not agree to change the grade, the student may write a  statement explaining why the grade was based on instructor error or bias,  attach supporting factual evidence, and submit it, along with the Grade  Change form, to the chair of the program in which the course is housed. The  chair may contact both parties to determine whether informal resolution is  possible. If the instructor and the chair are the same person, the  
documentation is submitted to the vice provost, who brings it to the  
school’s program chairs, who then designate one within their group to  
respond. 
o If resolution is achieved, the procedure in the first bulleted paragraph  is followed. 
o If resolution is not achieved, the chair forwards the appeal to the  
Program Committee, which is composed of the program's core faculty  
members or an ad hoc Appeal Committee of faculty within the  
program or the school. The instructor whose grade is under dispute is 
32 
ineligible to be on the Committee. The Committee may contact both  
parties. 
o If the Committee decides the grade is to be changed, it  
determines the new grade and forwards the Grade Change form  
to the Office of the Registrar, which updates the student’s  
record and notifies the student and instructor. 
o If the Committee decides the grade is not to be changed, it  
notifies the student and instructor. 
The decision of the Committee is final; no appeals will be considered by deans, the  provost, or the president. 
Grade Option Request Procedure 
Some courses are offered only for letter grades, some only for Pass/No Pass (P/NP), and  some for either. Students may elect their option when they register online. This option may  be changed up through the Add Deadline, but it is not possible to do so online; students  must submit either a Grade Option Change form to the Office of the Registrar or send an  email to registrar@ciis.edu. Emailed requests must originate from the student’s CIIS email  account. Students may not change a grade option past the Add Deadline, even with the  instructor’s permission. 
Grade Scale 
Only CIIS courses are used to compute the GPA, not courses transferred in from other  schools. The University uses a four-point scale to calculate a grade point average (GPA).  Grade point values are assigned as follows: 
Undergraduate Grade Scale Graduate Grade Scale 
Grade Indication Quality Points per  Unit 
A 
	Outstanding 
	4.0
	A– 
	Outstanding 
	3.7
	B+ 
	Good 
	3.3
	B 
	Good 
	3.0
	B– 
	Good 
	2.7
	C+ 
	Average 
	2.3
	C 
	Average 
	2.0
	C– 
	Average 
	1.7
	D+ 
	Poor 
	1.3
	D 
	Poor 
	1.0
	D– 
	Poor 
	0.7
	F 
	Failure 
	0.0
	



Grade Indication Quality Points  per Unit
A 
	Outstanding 
	4.0
	A– 
	Very Good 
	3.7
	B+ 
	Good 
	3.3
	B 
	Average 
	3.0
	B– 
	Below Average,  but Passing
	2.7
	C+ 
	Failure 
	2.3
	C 
	Failure 
	2.0
	C– 
	Failure 
	1.7
	D 
	Failure 
	1.0
	F 
	Failure 
	0.0
	



These are Institute grade indications. Departments and programs may have indications  that are stricter than these. For instance, a B, not a B–, may be required to pass a  course. Consult the program handbook. 
33 
Grade
	

	AU 
	Audit
	AW 
	Administrative  
Withdrawal
	I 
	Incomplete
	IN 
	Permanent  
Incomplete
	IP 
	In Progress
	NP* 
	No Pass
	NS 
	Not Satisfactory
	P** 
	Pass
	TR 
	Transfer Credit
	W 
	Withdrawal
	X 
	Grade Not Received from  Instructor
	



* NP equivalent to C– or below for undergraduate student; B– or below for graduate  student. 
** P equivalent to C or higher for undergraduate student; B or higher for graduate student. 
The following grades are considered unsatisfactory grades for probation  purposes (see the Probation Policies in the “Academic Policies” section): AW, I,  IN, NP, and NS. 
Student Holds 
The Office of Student Accounts and the Library apply holds to the accounts of  students with outstanding financial obligations. Such holds prevent the student  from registering, graduating, or receiving their diplomas. To remove a hold or inquire  about its status, contact the Office of Student Accounts at 415.575.6132 or  studentaccounts@ciis.edu, or the Library at 415.575.6180 or library@ciis.edu.  Students who are provisionally admitted may register for only one semester. The  Office of the Registrar applies a hold to students who are provisionally admitted  and removes the hold when the student is fully admitted. 
Incompletes 
Students anticipating being unable to complete a course may request permission  from the instructor to receive an “I” (Incomplete) grade; students who have not  completed the work required for a course are not to be given a passing grade in  the course without completing the required work. CIIS courses are expected to be  organized in a way that allows work to be completed during the semester the  course is being offered. Below are the policies related to incomplete grades: 
1. Permission to be given an “I” grade is given only in the following circumstances: a. medical reasons documented by a healthcare professional;
34 
b. a family emergency verified with supporting documentation; or 
c. decision by faculty member based on exceptional pedagogical reasons. 2. The instructor has the right to refuse to grant an “I” grade. 
3. The Registrar’s Office does not record an “I” grade without receiving an Incomplete  Grade Request Form signed by the student and the instructor by the grade  submission deadline. This form stipulates what coursework is remaining and its due  date. 
4. The instructor, not the student, determines the deadline for the remaining  coursework. This deadline cannot exceed two semesters (including summer) from  the last day of the semester in which the course took place and can be earlier. (For  example, if the course is in fall 2023, the student has until the last day of summer  2024 to submit the work unless the instructor specifies an earlier deadline.) The  maximum deadline for an Incomplete given for exceptional pedagogical reasons is  one semester. This deadline is not extended for students who are on a leave of  absence, become inactive, or refrain from registering for any semester while the work  remains outstanding. 
5. If the student does not submit the coursework by this deadline, the “I” grade  converts to an “IN” (Permanent Incomplete). An “IN” is irreversible. 
6. Students may not graduate with an “I” grade on their record even in an elective  course. Students may graduate with an “IN” grade on their record, provided that if  the IN was for a required course, the student later successfully repeated the course. 
7. The submission of an “I” grade by an instructor does not imply that that instructor  will be a CIIS employee in a subsequent semester. It is the student’s responsibility  to maintain current contact information for this instructor. 
8. Students may not sit in on a subsequent semester’s offering of the same course in  order to make up the coursework. 
9. When submitting the remaining coursework, the student must include a signed Grade  Change Form. The instructor uses this form to notify the Registrar’s Office of the  final grade. 
Limit on Number of Incompletes 
Program chairs are asked to discuss and assess the circumstances with any faculty  member granting more than 20% of grades in a course as Incompletes. Programs in which  more than 20% of the grades are Incompletes will be asked to provide a written  explanation to the Vice Provost. 
.
35 
THE LAURANCE S. ROCKEFELLER LIBRARY 
Contact Information 
Information, hours, and links to resources https://library.ciis.edu 
Program specific liaison contacts: 
Circulation 415.575.6180, circ@ciis.edu Course Reserves reserve@ciis.edu 
Reference services and research help help@ciis.libanswers.com Interlibrary loan ill@ciis.edu 
Faculty Library Services https://library.ciis.edu/libraryservices/faculty Need Help? https://ciis.libanswers.com/ 
Adjunct Faculty Library Privileges 
Adjunct Faculty have library privileges during the semester(s) in which they are teaching  courses at CIIS; their library privileges expire at the end of the term and become active again  when they next teach at CIIS. 
Print and Electronic Resources 
The Library’s main goal is to provide resources and research assistance to support the  academic work of the University. To further this goal, we maintain a collection of books, e books, journals, e-journals, dissertations, streaming video, and other A/V curated to support  CIIS programs and pedagogies. 
A small sample of our subscription-only research tools and scholarly resources include, APA  databases, MEDLINE, Humanities International Complete, PEP Web, LGBT Life full text,  Psychotherapy.net, Alternative Health Watch, Archives of Research in Archetypal Symbolism,  SAGE Research Methods, e-book packages from JSTOR, SAGE, EBSCO, and ProQuest, and e journal packages from Science Direct, Wiley, Duke, SAGE, Oxford, and Taylor & Francis. 
Research Assistance 
Access is only one side to supporting graduate-level research (especially in the  interdisciplinary and trans- disciplinary areas explored at CIIS), and so Library staff also  provide extensive research assistance. Reference services are available virtually and in  person, and via e-mail, phone and chat. Use contact information above or our chat widget on  our home page for inquiries; schedule an appointment for in-depth individual assistance. 
Library Instruction and Training 
Librarians also offer workshops and in-class instruction sessions. To request class-integrated  research instruction, orientations, and training, please fill out our Library Instruction Request  Form. Have questions about instruction? Please email help@ciis.libanswers.com. 
Library Course Reserves 
Each semester, instructors are encouraged to use the wealth of CIIS Library resources when  adopting course readings, and linking to the resources in their syllabus. 
Faculty may also place books, e-books, videos, and streaming videos on Course Reserve for  their class. This service is designed to ensure that students have easier and more equitable  access to the materials. It can also help to save students money on required readings! 
The CIIS Library can make required course readings available to students including:
36 
• Providing links to resources (e-books and streaming video) the CIIS Library owns  or has access to that you can add to your syllabus or Canvas 
• Purchase of course-required books, e-books, video, and streaming video that  the CIIS Library does not have access to (depending on collection criteria,  availability, and budget) 
• Physical items on reserve shelves (where feasible) 
Instructors can submit a Library Course Reserves Request Form in which they will list the  required material for their class. The Library will then work to process the request and build  a course-specific listing in our Library Catalog.  
• Please submit course reserve requests before the start of every semester • Up to 12 items may be placed on reserve for a class if they are required course  materials 
• Print copies of reserve books may be checked-out and read in the library for up  to 2 hours 
• Physical A/V materials must be viewed in the Library, or have pre-arranged  class showing dates 
• A course-specific reserves page for each class can be found in the Course  Reserves Listings in our Library Catalog 
For more detailed information please visit: https://library.ciis.edu/reserves/faqs 
Items not eligible to be put on reserve: 
• Copies of video or audio tapes, CDs or DVDs 
• Photocopies of book chapters or articles 
• Course packets or readers 
Requests can take up to two weeks to process, perhaps longer if we need to purchase  items. Although we recommend submitting your requests as early as possible, we accept  requests anytime. 
Please note - Course Reserve requests expire at the end of the semester. We recommend  filling out a new form before the start of every new semester so we can provide students with  the most up to date and accurate information! 
Renewals and Hold Requests 
Patrons request renewals themselves, by logging in to their personal account in the CIIS  Library catalog, linked from the main Library webpage. Patrons may also request items  currently on the shelves, and/or items currently checked out, by placing a hold request when  logged into their personal account. When one of your requested items becomes available, it  will be held for you at the Circulation desk in the Library for 1 week. First-time users, our  system uses your CIIS email credentials to log in. You must have received your CIIS email  credentials from IT before you can place holds, however, you do not need to log in to search  the catalog. 
Interlibrary loan 
Faculty are encouraged to use interlibrary loan (ILL) services for materials not available in  CIIS collections. We do not charge for our services; although the patron is responsible for any  fees charged by the lending library, you can specify whether you are willing to pay a fee or  nothing when you make the initial request. Our policies, procedure, and login can be found  here: https://library.ciis.edu/ill. You can have up to 12 active ILL requests at a time. Requests  statuses can be tracked within your library account.
37 
Recommendations for Purchase 
If you have title suggestions for purchase to add to the general library collection, please fill  out our Purchase Suggestion Form You may also contact your program’s library liaison. 
Patron Responsibilities 
All library patrons, including faculty, are responsible for proper care of library materials, and  will be held liable for replacement costs for any material lost, stolen, or damaged when in  their care. All library patrons are also responsible for any fee incurred for services they  request (e.g., interlibrary loan fees); and likewise for all fines incurred for overdue materials.  Library policies are explained in more detail in the Library Services tab on the Library Web  site. Library privileges and/or access may be suspended or revoked for violation of these  policies. 
Remember: Always check the Library Web site and Faculty Services page for our most current  hours, and our up-to-date policies and procedures.
38 
OPERATIONS 
The Office of Campus Experience & Events provides the following services: reception,  ordering office supplies, processing mail, classroom support, events support, audio-video  equipment and room reservations.  
The Facilities & Business Operations department provides the following services: security,  building maintenance and improvements, keys, janitorial, maintaining copy machines and  other equipment. 
Outgoing Mail 
All outgoing CIIS mail requires that the sender write the Program Code on the front of the  mail piece. Outgoing Mail Drop located at the 4th floor reception desk at 1453 Mission Street CIIS does not pay for postage on personal outgoing mail; mail with its own postage will be  sent out. 
Copy Machines 
A copier is available on each floor; each requires a four-digit code in order to operate. Please  see your Department/Program Coordinator to receive your code. 
  
Facilities at CIIS 
If you ever find something is broken in a classroom please send a message to Facilities to  help ensure that the issue gets resolved promptly. 
 
  
For Facilities related requests,  Contact:
	  
Maintenance@ciis.edu 
	For Questions or Training Relating to CANVAS or Classroom  
Audio/Visual Equipment, 
Contact:
	  
OnlineLearningSupport@ciis.edu 
	For assistance with processing  Audio/Visual requests,  
Contact:
	OperationsRequests@ciis.edu  
4th Floor Reception  
Or 415.575.6101  
415.655.5566 
	



39 
UNIVERSITY POLICIES 
Chosen Name and Identity Policy 
Whether the desire or need for a chosen name and identity derives from circumstances  involving gender identity, marital, political, spiritual, or religious preferences, CIIS seeks to  foster a campus environment that both encourages self-expression and affirms identity. 
CIIS acknowledges and honors the fact that CIIS faculty, staff, and students, including  certificate and Public Programs participants, may have a name that is different from their  legal name and related pronoun(s), salutation, and chosen identity for sex, sexual orientation,  gender, and ethnicity. 
CIIS students, faculty, and staff may use lived names other than their legal name to identify  themselves, regardless of whether they have legally changed their name, except where their  legal names are required by law or regulation. 
In accordance with this recognition, every attempt will be made by the University to honor  students’ and employees’ preferences in the establishment, maintenance, and  communication of records, reports, lists, and electronic portals. CIIS records will reflect  individuals’ preferences wherever legal requirements or system constraints do not dictate  the use of legal name and limited identity choices. 
Most CIIS systems allow records to be updated by staff acting on behalf of the requesting  individual. Students and employees should be aware that CIIS is required to maintain certain  records and report data in accordance with federal regulations that do not provide the same  breadth of categories and options as CIIS. 
CIIS reserves the right to ensure that individuals’ preferences: 
1. Are in compliance with other University policies that prohibit providing false or  misleading information 
2. Are not being used to misrepresent, be fraudulent, or avoid legal or financial  obligations 
3. Do not violate copyright 
4. Do not include offensive, harassing, obscene, or derogatory language 
A chosen name must still provide some meaningful identity of the individual to other  students, faculty, and staff. Inclusion of numbers, symbols, and emojis is not allowed. 
Chosen names identified as potentially not in compliance with this policy will be reviewed by  a committee composed of representatives from core student system functional areas.  Students or employees who feel their preferences were unjustly denied may file an appeal  with the President (faculty or staff) or Provost (students). 
Where chosen name, pronouns, and identity are used by default: 
Admissions records  
ID cards  
• CIIS email accounts  
• CIIS email distribution lists  
• Class lists (outside of Canvas)  
• Canvas  
• Colleague – Self-Service  
• Unofficial transcripts 
40 
• Library  
• Diplomas  
• Internal (CIIS) reports not requiring distribution to external agencies  • Alumni records  
Where legal name and identity are required to be used: 
• Professional licensure forms and documents  
• Visas and other immigration documents  
• Employment records, verifications, and paychecks  
• Payroll and tax documents  
• Mandated reports to the US Department of Education and other federal and state  agencies 
Procedures for Designating Preferences 
Faculty and Staff: Colleague has a Self-Service procedure for creating a chosen name; this  will be used in records and correspondence that do not require use of the legal name. 
Legally Changing Your Name 
1. Faculty and Staff: Contact the Human Resources Office. You must include photocopies  of identification materials that may include: a court order, a driver’s license, a  passport, a marriage license, a divorce decree reinstating a maiden name, adoption  papers, or a uniformed service military ID. 
Office Contacts for Chosen Name and Identity Policy 
1. Faculty and Staff: Human Resources Office 
Resources for Education and Support 
Support for students and employees navigating issues of identity: Office of Diversity, Equity,  and Inclusion. 
Drug-Free Campus Policy 
The misuse and abuse of drugs (controlled substances) and the abuse of alcohol can lead to  serious health problems, including addiction, severe disability, and even death. In response to  these concerns, the US Congress passed the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 and the Drug Free Schools and Communities Act Amendments of 1989. 
In accordance with these acts, CIIS has enacted a policy maintaining a drug-free workplace  and campus. The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, and/or use of  controlled substances or the unlawful possession, use, or distribution of alcohol is prohibited  in CIIS facilities, in the workplace, or as part of any of the University’s activities. The  workplace and campus are presumed to include all premises where activities of the  University are conducted. Violation of this policy may result in disciplinary sanctions up to  and including termination of employment or expulsion of students. 
Violations may also be referred to the appropriate authorities for prosecution. 
Furthermore, federal, state, and local laws regulate the unlawful manufacture, distribution,  dispensation, possession, and/or use of controlled substances or alcohol. These laws impose  sanctions for both misdemeanor and felony convictions. Criminal penalties for convictions  can range from fines and probation to denial or revocation of federal benefits (such as  student loans) to imprisonment and forfeiture of personal and real property. 
CIIS encourages any staff, faculty, and/or students who are concerned about substance use,  abuse, and rehabilitation to contact a physician for a referral to confidential substance abuse  counseling. If a student is expelled or terminated as a result of violating the drug-free policy, 
41 
CIIS will consider an application from the individual for reinstatement only after the student  successfully completes a rehabilitation program (including after-care). 
CIIS faculty are prohibited from using their standing as professors to assist others to illegally  use entheogenic, psychedelic, entactogenic (amphetamine-like, e.g., ecstasy, MDMA, 5-APB)  and other controlled substances. Academic research approved by the University does not  constitute such assistance. Students who are concerned about substance use, abuse, and  rehabilitation are strongly urged to contact their family physician, who can refer them to  appropriate resources (community or private agencies) that provide complete, confidential  substance abuse counseling. The Drug-Free Campus Policy is available online on the CIIS  website here. 
FERPA—Students’ Rights Regarding Their Education Records 
California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS) maintains student education records in  compliance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), Public Law  93-380, as amended. FERPA affords students these rights with respect to their education  records: 
1. The right to inspect and review the student’s education records within 45 days after  the day CIIS receives a request for access. A student should submit to the registrar,  Dean, head of the academic department, or other appropriate official a written  request that identifies the record(s) the student wishes to inspect. The school official  will make arrangements for access and notify the student of the time and place where  the records may be inspected. The educational records are the property of CIIS, and  CIIS will not supply copies to the student, unless the student is unable to view them  otherwise (i.e., it is impossible for the student to come to CIIS). In that case,  photocopies will be supplied at 25 cents per image. 
2. The right to request the amendment of the student’s education records that the  student believes are inaccurate, misleading, or otherwise in violation of the student’s  privacy rights under FERPA. Students who wish to ask CIIS to amend a record should  write the school official responsible for the record, clearly identify the part of the  record they want changed and specify why it should be changed. If CIIS decides not to  amend the record as requested, it will notify the student in writing of the decision and  the student’s right to a hearing regarding the request for amendment. Additional  information regarding the hearing procedures will be provided to the student when  notified of the right to a hearing. 
3. The right to provide written consent before CIIS discloses personally identifiable  information (PII) from the student’s education records, except to the extent that  FERPA authorizes disclosure without consent. Such authorization includes the  following: 
a. To school officials with legitimate educational interests. A “school official” is a  person employed by CIIS in an administrative, supervisory, academic, research,  or support staff position (including security personnel); a person serving on the  board of trustees; or a student serving on an official committee, such as a  disciplinary or grievance committee; a volunteer or contractor outside of CIIS  who performs an institutional service or function for which CIIS would  otherwise use its own employees and who is under the direct control of CIIS  with respect to the use and maintenance of PII from education records.  Examples of the last could include an attorney, auditor, or collection agent, or a  student volunteering to assist another school official in performing their tasks.  A school official has “legitimate educational interests” if the official needs to  review an education record in order to fulfill their professional responsibilities  for CIIS.
42 
b. FERPA permits an institution, for the purposes of conducting its functions, to  identify a subset of students’ PII as “directory information” that can be  disclosed without the student’s prior written consent. Directory information is  considered not generally harmful or an invasion of privacy if disclosed. CIIS  designates only the following as a student’s directory information: full name,  address, email address, telephone number, photograph, program of study, dates  of attendance, enrollment status (e.g., full-time, half-time), participation in  officially recognized activities, and degree and awards received. Students may  direct CIIS to not disclose their directory information. To initiate or revoke this  directive, students should contact the registrar. 
c. Upon request, to officials of another school where the student seeks or intends  to enroll, or where the student is already enrolled if the disclosure is for  purposes related to the student’s enrollment or transfer, subject to the  requirements of §99.34. FERPA requires a school to make a reasonable attempt  to notify each student of these disclosures. 
d. To authorized representatives of the US Comptroller General, the US Attorney  General, the US Secretary of Education, or state and local educational  authorities. Disclosures under this provision may be made, subject to the  requirements of §99.35, in connection with an audit or evaluation of federal- or  state-supported education programs, or for the enforcement of or compliance  with federal legal requirements that relate to those programs. These entities  may make further disclosures of PII to outside entities that are designated by  them as their authorized representatives to conduct any audit, evaluation, or  enforcement or compliance activity on their behalf. 
NOTE REGARDING POINT D: As of January 3, 2012, the US Department of Education’s FERPA  regulations expand the circumstances under which student education records and PII  contained in such records — including Social Security Number, grades, or other private  information — may be accessed without the student’s consent. First, the US Comptroller  General, the US Attorney General, the US Secretary of Education, or state and local  education authorities (“Authorities”) may allow access to records and PII without consent to  any third party designated by an Authority to evaluate a federal- or state-supported  education program. Second, Authorities may allow access to education records and PII to  researchers performing certain types of studies — in certain cases even if the school does  not request or even objects to such research. The Authorities must obtain certain use restriction and data security promises from the entities that they authorize to receive the  students’ PII, but the Authorities need not maintain direct control over such entities. Additionally, in connection with Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems, state Authorities may  collect, compile, permanently retain, and share without students’ consent PII from education  records, and may track students’ participation in education and other programs by linking  such PII to other personal information obtained from other federal or state data sources,  including workforce development, unemployment insurance, child welfare, juvenile justice,  military service, and migrant student records systems. 
e. In connection with financial aid for which the student has applied or which the  student has received, if the information is necessary to determine eligibility for  the aid, determine the amount of the aid, determine the conditions of the aid,  or enforce the terms and conditions of the aid. 
f. To organizations conducting studies for, or on behalf of, the school, in order to  (a) develop, validate, or administer predictive tests; (b) administer student aid  programs; or (c) improve instruction. 
g. To accrediting organizations to carry out their accrediting functions. h. To parents of an eligible student if the student is a dependent for IRS tax  purposes.
43 
i. To comply with a judicial order or lawfully issued subpoena. 
j. To appropriate officials in connection with a health or safety emergency,  subject to §99.36. 
k. To a victim of an alleged perpetrator of a crime of violence or a non-forcible sex  offense, subject to the requirements of §99.39. The disclosure may only include  the final results of the disciplinary proceedings with respect to that alleged  crime or offense, regardless of the finding. 
l. To the general public, the final results of a disciplinary proceeding, subject to  the requirements of §99.39, if the school determines the student is an alleged  perpetrator of a crime of violence or non-forcible sex offense and the student  has committed a violation of the school’s rules or policies with respect to the  allegation made against them. 
m. To parents of a student regarding the student’s violation of any federal, state,  or local law, or of any rule or policy of the school, governing the use or  possession of alcohol or a controlled substance if the school determines the  student committed a disciplinary violation and the student is under the age of  21. 
FERPA requires CIIS to record the disclosure of PII from the student’s education records  except for disclosures (a) to the student; (b) to school officials; (c) of directory information;  and (d) as related to some judicial orders or lawfully issued subpoenas. Students have a right  to inspect the record of disclosures. 
4. The right to file a complaint with the US Department of Education concerning alleged  failures by CIIS to comply with the requirements of FERPA. The Office that administers  FERPA is: 
Family Policy Compliance Office US Department of Education 400 Maryland Avenue, SW  Washington, DC 2020. 
Firearms Policy 
No firearms or any other dangerous weapons are permitted at the University. 
Policy for the Protection of Students from Sexual Misconduct 
CIIS is committed to maintaining its campus and programs free from all forms of sexual  misconduct. This particular policy is geared most directly to the protection and safety of  students. 
By this policy, all forms of sexual misconduct, including sexual and gender-related — violence, assault, harassment, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking — are  prohibited and will be promptly responded to with disciplinary or other corrective action  measures that are appropriate. 
This policy also explains the procedures of CIIS that allow for fact-finding for those students  who find themselves to be victims of sexual misconduct and to provide ways in which the  University supports and protects its students. 
This policy applies to misconduct whether it occurs on CIIS property or anywhere else that  has a connection to sponsored events or programs involving the University. Off-campus  conduct that the University thinks can interfere with students having a safe or welcoming  experience or education at the University, or that poses a threat or danger to the CIIS  community, is still within the University’s oversight for the protection of our students, and  any incidents should be brought to our attention. 
Getting Help: CIIS encourages all members of the CIIS community who believe they have  been victims of sexual misconduct to report these incidents to local law enforcement  authorities and to seek medical attention as needed. 
Statement of Nondiscrimination
44 
The University does not discriminate in its educational programs or services on the basis of  race, color, religion, religious creed, ancestry, national origin, age (except for minors), sex,  marital status, citizenship status, military service status, sexual orientation, medical  condition, disability, gender identity, and any another status protected by law. The University  will implement reasonable accommodation for qualified individuals with disabilities to the  extent required by law.  
CIIS does not permit discrimination or harassment in its programs and activities on the basis  of race, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender, gender identification or expression,  sexual orientation, disability, age, religion, medical condition, veteran status, marital status,  or any other characteristic protected under law. 
Unlawful Discrimination Policy 
The policy of California Institute of Integral Studies is to provide an educational and  employment environment in which no person shall be unlawfully denied full and equal  access to, be denied the benefits of—or be unlawfully subjected to discrimination on  the basis of ethnic group identification, national origin, religion, age, sex, race, color,  ancestry, sexual orientation, or physical or mental disability in—any program or activity  that is administered by, is funded directly by, or receives any financial assistance from  California Institute of Integral Studies. 
Employees, students, or other persons acting on behalf of the Institute who engage in  unlawful discrimination as defined in these policies or by state or federal law may be  subject to discipline, up to and including discharge, expulsion, or termination of  contract. 
Smoking Policy 
For the health, safety, and comfort of everyone, smoking and vaporizing are not permitted  anywhere or at any time within the buildings and facilities and during indoor or outdoor  events. The University is committed to full compliance with state law and prohibits smoking  and vaporizing in all enclosed workplaces. 
Communication Policy 
CIIS uses the following electronic means to communicate to students:  (1) the CIIS website, (2) the University-issued email account, (3) the CIIS student portal, and  (4) the online learning platform. CIIS presumes that students will read these communications in a timely fashion. Not reading them does not absolve a student from knowing and  complying with them. 
CIIS MyMail email is the mechanism for official communication within CIIS. CIIS has the right  to expect that such communications will be received and read in a timely fashion. Students  are expected to read, understand, and appropriately respond to official administrative emails.  Students will be responsible for any official administrative communication sent to their CIIS  email account. This will be the only email address to which official administrative  communication will be sent. Students should check their emails frequently, as it is the  official form of communication at CIIS. 
Faculty, Staff, and Students are expected to use the CIIS email account when communicating  with the University and to not share their password with anyone. Passwords are reset  regularly. These measures allow CIIS to verify that the email is coming from the student and  that further correspondence will not disclose the student’s information to others. Students  contacting CIIS faculty and staff through a personal account will be asked to re-contact us  using the CIIS account. This is true even for students who have set the account to redirect to  a personal one. See the “Student Email Policy.” 
Faculty are requested to refer to this policy in their syllabi.
45 
The Jeanne Clery Act 
The Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics  Act, codified at 20 USC 1092 (f) as part of the Higher Education Act of 1965, is a federal  law that requires colleges and universities to disclose timely and annual information  about campus crime and security policies. All public and private institutions of  postsecondary education participating in federal student aid programs are subject to the Act. For a complete report of CIIS’s statistics, visit the CIIS Catalog.
46 
TITLE IX POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR GOVERNING STUDENTS AND  EMPLOYEES 
Please review the Title IX Policy and Procedure at the CIIS Connect site here:  
You should have also received the Policy and Procedure document as part of your  onboarding, if you did not, please contact hr-faculty@ciis.edu for a copy.  
Romantic or Sexual Relationships; Other Dual Relationships  
(a) The University recognizes that romantic or sexual relationships between any faculty  member or member of the administration and any student presents substantial opportunities  for actual or perceived conflicts of interest, imbalances of power (and thus subtle or overt  coercion), miscommunication about consent, and favoritism, among other possible negative  consequences. For these reasons, the University prohibits any romantic or sexual  relationship, whether regarded as consensual or not, between a faculty member or member  of the administration and either  
(i) a CIIS student, or  
(ii) another University employee over whom that faculty member has  
supervisory or evaluative authority, or can be reasonably expected to do so in  the future. "Romantic or sexual relationship" is defined to include any  
relationship that a reasonable observer would consider to involve dating or  romantic or sexual intentions or actions, without regard to the length of the  relationship.  
(b) If the relevant faculty member or member of the administration believes that unique  factual circumstances make these policy considerations inapplicable to a specific dual  relationship (e.g., a romantic relationship that began before one or both parties occupied the  roles that make the relationship problematic), they may request review and written approval  for the relationship by the Provost or the Provost's designate. The Provost or the Provost's  designate will respect confidentiality considerations to the maximum degree that is practical,  and may require a management and review plan, or provision of alternate teaching,  supervisory, or evaluative authority, to reduce the risk of unfavorable consequences from the  relationship. The failure of a faculty member or member of the administration considering  such a relationship to request and obtain this written permission is a violation of this policy.  Only under unusual circumstances will the Provost or Provost designate consider giving  permission for such a dual relationship because it is inherently disruptive to a student’s  unencumbered course of study to have any dual relationship. 
(c) Other dual relationships are also potentially problematic. For example, if a faculty  member or member of the administration has a private practice as a psychotherapist, they  may not serve as therapist for either of the two categories of person listed in part (a), above.  Any other form of dual relationship that involves financial exchange or exchange of services  directly between the faculty member or member of the administration and a person in either  of those two categories should be submitted in writing to the Provost or the Provost's  designate for review and written approval prior to initiation of the dual relationship. The  failure of a faculty member or member of the administration considering such a relationship  to request and obtain this written approval in a timely manner is a violation of this policy. 
47 
(d) The University will impose appropriate discipline on faculty members and members of the  administration found to be in violation of this policy on dual relationships, under the informal  and formal procedures set forth in part VIII.F.2 of the Core Faculty Handbook.  
Criminal and Violent Behavior and Workplace Violence Policy 
The Institute maintains a Workplace Violence Policy, a copy of which is available in the Office of Human Resources. In the event of a campus incident created by individuals or  groups involved in violent, criminal or abnormal behavior or disturbances, the following  actions should be taken. If you feel any danger, immediately call 911 from any campus  phone or payphone. Then contact the Front Desk or Lobby Security in person or by  dialing 0 from any campus phone or 415.575.6100 from any non-campus phone. Provide  the reception staff and Public Safety Officers with the following information if possible: 1. Nature of the incident 
2. Location of the incident 
3. Description of the person or persons involved 
4. Description of the property involved 
All individuals should avoid risks in dealing with or observing any suspicious situations  or criminal offense. 
Filing a Grievance 
Adjunct faculty members should contact the Human Resources Office in the event  they wish to file a grievance. HR is located on the 5th floor of the Mission Street  Building and the phone number is 415.575.6161. 
Impaired Performance on the Job; Unlawful Use of Controlled Substances or  Alcohol in the Workplace 
Performance problems on the job can have many causes. In discussions with an  employee concerning any performance problem, the supervisor should offer to help the  employee determine the source of the problems and offer guidance on appropriate  assistance, counseling, or other resources. 
When job performance has become impaired, the supervisor should take normal  corrective action, beginning with discussion with the employee. When the behavior of  an employee on the job raises safety concerns for the employee and/or others in the  workplace, the supervisor must take immediate action to assess the situation; in such  cases employees must not be allowed to continue on the job. Specific actions to be  taken depend upon the facts of the particular situation. 
In a situation in which an employee acknowledges to the supervisor that poor  performance or unacceptable conduct results from substance abuse, the supervisor  should urge the employee to seek help from a qualified substance abuse treatment  resource. If the employee chooses to seek help, he or she should be referred to  appropriate sources. If the employee requests a leave of absence for a rehabilitation  program, the supervisor should take normal steps to review the request for such a  leave. Supervisors should make reasonable accommodation consistent with operational  requirements. 
If the employee demonstrating poor performance or unacceptable conduct claims  causes other than substance abuse are causing the problem, or does not elect to seek  help for whatever is the cause of the problem, the supervisor first should counsel the 
48 
employee in the ways his or her actions on the job need improvement or are  unacceptable. If improvement does not take place, the employee should be warned that  the poor performance can result in discipline, including termination of employment.  Managers should consult with their supervisors to decide upon an appropriate form of  action. 
Getting Help 
Employees and students who are concerned about substance use, abuse, and  rehabilitation are strongly urged to contact their family physicians who can refer  them to appropriate resources (community or private agencies) that provide  complete, confidential substance abuse counseling. 
Legal Sanctions 
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, and/or use of  controlled substances or alcohol is regulated by a number of federal, state and local  laws. These laws impose legal sanctions for both misdemeanor and felony convictions.  Criminal penalties for convictions can range from fines and probation to denial or  revocation of federal benefits (such as student loans) to imprisonment and forfeiture of  personal and real property.
49 
HUMAN RESOURCES & ONBOARDING INFORMATION 
Adjunct Faculty Contract 
We welcome you to CIIS. You have been sent a contract that outlines your duties, rank,  salary amount, and policies. If you have questions about your contract, contact: 
Amanda Poag, Academic Human Resources Coordinator hr-faculty@ciis.edu 
Onboarding 
The Human Resources Office will contact you to provide a link to book an onboarding session  to CIIS. 
Adjunct faculty are required to record their hours in an electronic timesheet; we will guide  you through this process in the onboarding. 
You should have a CIIS email address. If you have not received an email from US Wired with  instructions for setting up your CIIS email address, please email them directly at  support@uswired.com. It is your responsibility to check this email address frequently. All  official communications are sent to your CIIS address.  
The forms and information below will be sent to you at your CIIS email address. It is  important that you complete the information in order for you to be paid. Please complete  the information as soon as possible. If you have questions, contact hr-faculty@ciis.edu • Welcome Letter  
• Adjunct Staff Handbook 
• I-9 Employment Eligibility Verification Form 
• W-4 Employee's Tax Withholding Form & a link to State Tax Forms 
• Employee Self-Service Information  
• Direct Deposit form (Employee Self-Service) 
• Emergency Contact Information 
• Personal Information Sheet  
• Technology Policy 
• Fraud & Whistleblower Policy and Acknowledgement form 
• FERPA Training Information Sheet 
• Drug Free Workplace CIIS Employee Agreement 
• Employee Technology Acceptable Use Policy 
Payment Information 
Payment for adjunct faculty occurs semi-monthly at the beginning and end of each month  during the semester in which you teach. Adjunct faculty are paid hourly based on hours  submitted in Employee Self-Service - Time Entry.  
If you are unable to access Employee Self-Service, please contact DoT@ciis.edu. Instructions for timekeeping have been forwarded to you upon onboarding. Please reach out  to HR-Faculty@ciis.edu if you need additional assistance with entering hours worked in the  Employee Self-Service timekeeping system.  
Required Trainings 
You are required to complete three mandatory online trainings: 
• Cybersecurity 
• FERPA
50 
• Anti-harassment / Title IX 
Details will be sent to you after the Human Resources Office has received your paperwork. 
A payroll timeline schedule is available on CIIS Connect. If you do not enter your time, or  miss the deadline, please reach out to your supervisor, or program chair. Your supervisor, or  program chair must approve your hours and update your timekeeping record.  Direct deposit of your pay is the most secure and reliable method of payment. This can be  set up within the payroll system. You will need to enter your banking information via the  Employee Self-Service portal. If you have any difficulties, please contact HR Faculty@ciis.edu  
If you believe that your pay is incorrect, please contact HR-Faculty@ciis.edu  
Adjunct Expenses 
Each adjunct faculty receives a $100 per semester per department to approximate the  maximum costs of any personal electronic devices for use in performing work for CIIS. This  will be paid with the first paycheck of your contract and is not generally subject to taxation.  If you incur work-related expenses beyond that amount for personal electronic devices or for  other expenses, you must contact your program chair or dean in advance about the expense  and await a response. All approved expenses will be reimbursed. 
Timekeeping 
CIIS complies with California law regarding adjunct faculty timekeeping. You must enter the  time you work both during class and after in Employee Self-Service. You will be paid for all  hours worked. Hours worked beyond those contracted must be approved by your Program  Chair and the Associate Provost. 
Paid Time Off 
Sick Leave 
All employees receive 1-hour sick leave for every 30 hours worked per year. If you require time off because of illness contact or Program Chair as soon as possible.  Additionally, enter your sick time in Employee Self-Service - Time Entry.  
Extended Sick Leave 
If you are or know that you will be absent more than three (3) days, contact your Program  Chair, the Associate Provost, and HR-faculty@ciis.edu. For extended leaves, beyond seven (7)  days, CIIS integrates with State Disability Insurance. Contact HR-faculty@ciis.edu if you have  questions. 
Maximum Units 
The maximum units allowed without approval of the Vice Provost are 12 units per semester.
51