CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF INTEGRAL STUDIES 
  

FACULTY HANDBOOK 
Revised May 25, 2023
Table of Contents 
I. Overview........................................................................................................... 3 II. Mission, Educational Philosophy, and Seven Commitments...................... 3 1. Practice integral approaches to learning and research ........................... 4 2. Affirm spirituality..................................................................................4 3. Commit to diversity and inclusion............................................................ 4 4. Foster multiple ways of learning and teaching....................................4 5. Advocate sustainability and social justice ............................................... 4 6. Support community.................................................................................. 4 7. Strive for an integral and innovative governance .................................... 5 III. Academic Freedom .................................................................................... 5 IV. Faculty Governance ......................................................................................... 7 A. University Faculty.................................................................................. 7 B. Faculty Council .................................................................................8 C. Administrative Committees with Faculty Representation.................... 21 V. Faculty Duties and Responsibilities.......................................................... 28 A. General................................................................................................ 29 B. Service...................................................................................................... 34 C. Scholarship.......................................................................................... 35 D. Ethical Responsibilities and Prohibited Behaviors .............................. 37 VI. Faculty Appointment Policies and Processes .......................................... 47 A. Terms and Ranking .................................................................................. 47 B. Faculty Personnel Records ................................................................. 54 C. Contracts ............................................................................................. 57 D. Evaluation Criteria and Process.......................................................... 63 E. Criteria for Scholarly and Creative Activities ..................................66 F. Criteria for Service to the University, Profession, and Community...68 G. Evaluation.......................................................................................69 H. Promotion ............................................................................................ 72 VII. Policies on Nonsabbatical Faculty Leaves ............................................... 78 A. Medical and Family Leaves of Absence (FMLA/CFRA)...................... 78 B. The Integration of Federal (FMLA) and State (CFRA) Leave Laws..... 79 C. Notification Requirements for Your Own Serious Health Condition ... 79 D. Notification Requirements for Leave to Care for a Family Member... 80 E. Service Member FMLA Leave.................................................................. 80
F. Pregnancy Disability Leave ...................................................................... 81 G. Extended Discretionary Medical Leave of Absence............................ 84 H. Personal Leave Without Pay............................................................... 85 I. Compassionate Leave.............................................................................. 85 J. Benefits While On Leave .................................................................... 85 
VIII. Separation ................................................................................................ 87 A. Resignation ......................................................................................... 88 B. Retirement........................................................................................... 88 C. Notice of Non-reappointment of Core Faculty ................................88 D. Termination for Medical Reasons...................................................89 E. Layoffs ............................................................................................89 F. Dismissal,Suspension, Demotion, or Deprivation ofPay for Cause .92 
IX. Grievance Procedures.............................................................................. 96 A. Definition.........................................................................................97 B. Grievance Procedures......................................................................... 97 X. Appendices................................................................................................... 102 
A. Criteria for Closing Academic Programs 
B. Comprehensive Examination Assessment Rubric 
C. Thesis-Dissertation Proposal Assessment Rubric 
D. Thesis-Dissertation Approval Assessment Rubric 
E. Policies Related to Intellectual Property
I. Overview 
The purpose of this Handbook is to provide the members of the  faculty, particularly those who are new to CIIS, with knowledge of the  policies, regulations, practices, and expectations that prevail at the  University. The provisions of this Handbook are subject to revision  from time to time, following procedures involving the administration  and faculty. The faculty or the administration may initiate proposed  changes. 
The provisions of this Handbook derive their authority from various  sources; they are primarily statements approved both by the  administration and faculty, of customary practice, administrative  organization, or explicit policy established at the University. Conditions  of employment are derived fromactions taken by the Board of Trustees;  changes to faculty personnel policies are recommended by the faculty  and approved by the President. Academic policies are also  recommended to and approved by the President. The description of  University facilities and other general information are provided as  helpful addenda. The provisions of the Handbook are subject to  modification or revocation by the appropriate authority following proper  procedure as described here or in the bylaws of the Trustees, subject  to final approval by the Board of Trustees. No such change will be  retroactive. 
Along with the sources specifically cited in the Handbook, the text  and organization were influenced greatly by guidelines of the  American Association of University Professors and the American  Psychological Association and faculty manuals from numerous other  institutions of higher education. 
II. Mission, Educational Philosophy, and Seven Commitments  California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS) is an accredited  University that strives to embody spirit, intellect, and wisdom in  service to individuals, communities, and the earth. CIIS expands the  boundaries of traditional degree programs with transdisciplinary,  cross-cultural, and applied studies utilizing face-to-face, hybrid,  and online pedagogical approaches. Offering a personal learning  environment and supportive community, CIIS provides an excellent  multifaceted education for people committed to transforming  themselves, others, and the world. 
The University community aspires to embody Seven Commitments:
Page 3 
1. Practice integral approaches to learning and research 
The University strives to facilitate the integration of body-mind-spirit. It  values the intellectual, emotional, spiritual, imaginal, creative, somatic, and  social dimensions of human potentiality. Committed to studies and practices  that cross traditional disciplinary boundaries, CIIS emphasizes dynamic  systems understanding and integrative learning. 
2. Affirm spirituality 
The University is committed to studiesand practices of multiple spiritual and  wisdom traditions and to their expression and embodiment throughout the  university community. While no one tradition is shared by all, the importance  of the spiritual dimension of life is affirmed. 
3. Commit to diversity and inclusion 
Promoting a dialogue of difference, the University is committed to reflecting  the diversity of the world's peoples, cultures, and spiritual traditions. At CIIS,  inclusion means consciously welcoming the contributions of all people to  academic scholarship and multiple ways of knowing. CIIS embraces  intellectual, cultural, and spiritual traditions that further the effectiveness of  emancipatory movements, such as feminism, and social and political  liberation. 
4. Foster multiple ways of learning and teaching 
The University honors many learning modalities and ways of knowing,  providing a rigorous and transformative education across all learning  approaches. CIIS welcomes experiential, collaborative, embodied, artistic,  participatory, and other modes of learning and knowing into the classroom,  believing that they deepen and enrich the learning experience. 
5. Advocate sustainability and social justice 
CIIS is committed to exploring and promoting knowledge and practices that  affirm human solidarity with the entire Earth community. Recognizing that  business as usual threatens the integrity of life itself on a planetary scale and  perpetuates structures of oppression on a large portion of the human  population, CIIS strives to generate creative alternatives leading to a just and  flourishing world. 
6. Support community 
Community at CIIS is founded upon core values that affirm shared  understandings and differences, scholarly efforts, and compassionate action.  Such community is a vital part of the University's aspiration to provide an  effective, visionary, and nurturing environment for integral education. CIIS is  committed to providing a welcoming community for all people.
Page 4 
7. Strive for an integral and innovative governance 
The University recognizes the significance of a mode of governance that  would eliminate, or at least reduce, the polarities and fragmentation that  typically plague organizations. The commitment to integral governance aims  to inspire holistic organizational interaction among all members of its  community. This commitment stands among the seven as a constant  challenge and encouragement to try new forms, procedures, criteria, and  language that reflect a more progressive and collaborative decision-making  process. 
III. Academic Freedom 
California Institute of Integral Studies recognizes and supports the principle  of academic freedom, by which each faculty member has certain rights, as  regulated by university policy in this handbook and by reasonable limitation,  to: teach, conduct research, and publish material relevant to that faculty  
member's discipline, even when such material is controversial. CIIS aspires  to maintain an atmosphere of mutual respect in its discourse that allows  for the safe expression of widely diverse viewpoints. The university also  guarantees to its faculty the same rights shared by all citizens, which  include: 
• The right to free expression, 
• The right to assemble, and 
• The right to criticize and seek revision of the institution's regulations. 
At the same time, the faculty should recognize an equally binding obligation  to perform their academic duties responsibly and to comply with the  internal regulations of the university. 
Each faculty member is expected to recognize the right of free expression of  other members of the university community; harassment, ad homonym  attacks, and personal abuse are unacceptable. 
Faculty shall not claim to be representing CIIS unless authorized to do so. 
CIIS endorses the nationally recognized definition of academic freedom  from the American Association of University Professors (AAUP): The 1940  Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure with 1970  Interpretative Comments, as follows: 
(a) Teachers are entitled to full freedom in research and in the publication  of results, subject to the adequate performance of their other academic  duties; but research, for pecuniary return, should be based upon an
Page 5 
understanding with the authorities of the institution. 
(b) Teachers are entitled to freedom in the classroom in discussing their  subject, but they should be careful not to introduce into their teaching  controversial subject matter which has no relation to the subject.  Limitations of academic freedom because of religious or other aims of the  institution should be clearly stated in writing at the time of appointment. 
(c) College and university teachers are citizens, members of a learned  profession, and officers of an educational institution. When they speak or  write as citizens, they should be free from institutional censorship or  discipline, but their special position in the community imposes special  obligations. As scholars and educational officers, they should remember  that the public may judge their profession and institution by their  utterances. Hence, they should at all times be accurate, should exercise  appropriate restraints, should show respect for the opinions of others, and  should make every effort to indicate they are not speaking for the  institution (AAUP, Policy Documents & Reports, Tenth Edition, pp. 3-4). 
CIIS also endorses the Statement of Professional Ethics from the American  Association of University Professors (AAUP, Policy Documents & Reports,  Tenth Edition, pp. 133-134), as follows: 
1. Professors, guided by a deep conviction of the worth and dignity of  the advancement of knowledge, recognize the special responsibilities  placed upon them. Their primary responsibility to their subject is to  seek and to state the truth as they see it. To this end professors  devote their energies to developing and improving their scholarly  competence. They accept the obligation to exercise critical self discipline and judgment in using, extending, and transmitting  knowledge. They practice intellectual honesty. Although professors  may follow subsidiary interests, these interests must never seriously  hamper or compromise their freedom of inquiry. 
2. As teachers, professors encourage the free pursuit of learning in their  students. They hold before them the best scholarly and ethical  standards of their discipline. Professors demonstrate respect for  students as individuals and adhere to their proper roles as  intellectualguidesand counselors.Professors make every reasonable  effort to foster honest academic conduct and to ensure that their  evaluations of students reflect each student’s true merit. They  respect the confidential nature of the relationship between professor  and student. They avoid any exploitation, harassment, or  discriminatory treatment of students. They acknowledge significant  academic or scholarly assistance from them. They protect their  academic freedom.
Page 6 
3. As colleagues, professors have obligations that derive from common  membership in the community of scholars. Professors do not  discriminate against or harass colleagues. They respect and defend  the free inquiry of associates. In the exchange of criticism and ideas  professors show due respect for the opinions of others. Professors  acknowledge academic debt and strive to be objective in their  professional judgment of colleagues. Professors accept their share of  faculty responsibilities for the governance of their institution. 
4. As members of an academic institution, professors seek above all to  be effective teachers and scholars. Although professors observe the  stated regulations of the institution, provided the regulations do not  contravene academic freedom, they maintain their right to criticize  
and seek revision. Professors give due regard to their paramount  responsibilities within their institution in determining the amount and  character of work done outside it. When considering the interruption  or termination of their service, professors recognize the effect of  their decision upon the program of the institution and give due notice  of their intentions. 
5. As members of their community, professors have the rights and  obligations of other citizens. Professors measure the urgency of these  obligations in the light of their responsibilities to their subject, to  their students, to their profession, and to their institution. When they  speak or act as private persons, they avoid creating the impression of  speaking or acting for their college or university. As citizens engaged  in a profession that depends upon freedom for its health and  integrity, professors have a particular obligation to promote  conditions of free inquiry and to further public understanding of  academic freedom. 
IV. Faculty Governance 
A. University Faculty 
The Board of Trustees is the governing body of the University. The  Board delegates various powers to the President and the faculty of  the University’s four Schools: the School of Professional  Psychology and Health, the School of Consciousness and  Transformation, the School of Undergraduate Studies, and the  American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Subject to the  determination of the President and the approval of the Board, with  appropriate administrative review Core Faculty have the authority  and responsibility to recommend the establishment and  implementation of professional policy, which includes, but is not  limited to, admissions, curricula, instruction, academic standards,  research, and criteria for selection, reappointment, promotion, and
Page 7 
discipline of faculty. The faculty may also initiate the process for  determining and revising academic policies and standards  concerning students. 
The right of selection and appointment of the President rests with  the Board. It is expected that the Board will include Core Faculty  and other university stakeholders in the selection process. 
The selection of the Provost is the responsibility of the President  with input from the Core Faculty. 
The selection of the Deans is the responsibility of the Provost with  input from the Core Faculty. 
The Core Faculty shall advise the President of the University on  matters concerning the general welfare of the University. 
The Faculty Executive Committee, except when the Faculty Council  might direct otherwise, is the duly constituted representative of the  faculty. 
Faculty authority is naturally subject to the provisions of this  Handbook and other regulations of the faculty, programs, and  other academic units as may be established. Faculty Council will  recommend educational policy to the Provost for review and  approval by the President and the Board of Trustees. 
Core Faculty of CIIS are those persons appointed for .50 FTE or  full-time with academic rank as assistant, associate, or full  professor and those appointed .50 FTE or full-time as lecturers  or senior lecturers. 
Adjunct faculty and Visiting faculty are those persons who are  appointed to such titles in accordance with the relevant sections  of the Faculty Handbook. They are not members of the Faculty  Council. 
B. Faculty Council 
The Faculty Council is comprised of Core Faculty members. The  Faculty Council holds the governance duties and responsibilities of  the faculty as described above. The Faculty Council shall consist  
of (a) all members of the Core Faculty, and as non-voting, ex  officio members: (b) the Provost Deans as , (c) a student selected  by the Student Union, and (d) a staff liaison appointed by the Staff  Association.
Page 8 
1. Faculty Council Meeting Procedures 
Faculty Council meetings will be held monthly during the  academic year, as determined by the Executive Committee.  The Executive Committee has the authority to call additional  meetings as needed. 
The Executive Committee will set the agenda for the Faculty  Council meetings. 
A majority of Core Faculty shall be considered a quorum for  decision making at Faculty Council. 
All Core Faculty members have voting privileges in meetings  of the Faculty Council and in elections of faculty  
representatives to the Board of Trustees and to committees.  Faculty must be present in person or by official video  conference link at meetings to vote. 
Procedural rules for meetings shall be those of Robert’s Rules  of Order Newly Revised except as the Council may specify  otherwise by majority vote. The chair of the Executive  Committee may appoint a parliamentarian. With majority  concurrence, meetings of the Council and of its committees  may be conducted in an informal manner, consistent with  professional courtesy and fairness. 
The privilege of the floor is extended by the Faculty Executive  Committee to the CIIS President and Provost as well as to  adjunct and visiting faculty. The Executive Committee may  invite other administrative officials to address the Council. 
Summary minutes of Faculty Council meetings shall be kept,  posted internally, and distributed to all Council members and  to the President. 
2. Faculty Governance Committees 
In order to accomplish its work, the Faculty Council has a series  of standing faculty governance committees established by this  Handbook. 
The Faculty Council shall have these faculty governance  committees listed here, with each committee stipulating  whether its members are elected by the Faculty Council or
Page 9 
appointed by the Executive Committee: 
1. Faculty Executive Committee 
2. Curriculum and Academic Review Committee 
3. Faculty Diversity and Inclusion Committee 
4. Faculty Affairs Committee 
5. Faculty Evaluation, Promotion, and Scholarship  Committee 
6. Faculty Planning and Budget Committee 
7. Faculty Grievance Committee 
8. Faculty Research Committee 
Faculty authority is delegated to these committees as  described in this section under each committee title.  Temporary or ad-hoc committees of the faculty may be  established by majority vote of the Faculty Council or  Executive Committee. Service to these temporary or ad-hoc  faculty committees may be approved as faculty service by  the Provost. Additionally, a faculty trustee and four faculty  representatives serve faculty interests based on the Board  of Trustees by-laws. 
Unless specified otherwise in this Handbook, faculty governance  committees are responsible to the Faculty Council and shall  therefore submit their recommendations on particular issues to  Faculty Executive Committee for action. In specified situations,  the recommendations of faculty governance committees or  other committees on which faculty participate are privileged or  confidential and are therefore simply reported to Faculty  Council as actions that have taken place. These specific  situations shall be delineated in this Handbook or in each  faculty governance committee’s policies and procedures. 
In general, actions regarding specific individuals have  confidential status and are not brought to the FacultyCouncil  for discussion and action. For example, recommendations  regarding evaluations of faculty members, decisions on  admission for specific individuals, and decisions on ethical  issues are not brought to the larger forum of the Faculty  Council for action. 
The Faculty Executive Committee will solicit committee  nominations for faculty governance committees and other faculty  service committees from individual faculty members in April by
Page 10 
distributing ballots. Votes should be counted in time to report the  vote to the May meeting of the Faculty Council. Faculty  governance committees that require elected representatives from  each School will have as representatives the members of each  School who receive the largest number of votes. Elected  members serve for 2 years from the first Faculty Council meeting  of the fall semester. Members may stand for reelection at the  end of their terms. Members of the faculty governance  committees elect their own chair before the end of Spring  semester and report Chair selection to Chair of Faculty Council in  June. 
Individual faculty members may make nominations for the Chair  of the Faculty Council/Executive Committee. The elected chair  serves for two (2) years from the first Faculty Council meeting of  the fall semester and receives 3 units of release time plus a  stipend. 
Unless otherwise specified in the descriptions in this section, a  faculty governance committee is constituted by at least 3 Core  Faculty members elected at large by the Faculty Council or  appointed by the Executive Committee. Each academic year,  the Executive Committee shall apportion representation among  the Schools as appropriate based on principles of equity and  representative governance. Members of a faculty governance  committee are appointed by the Executive Committee for any  open positions after elections for that committee. 
a. Faculty Executive Committee (FEC) 
The duties of the Faculty Executive Committee include  receiving the reports of all faculty governance committees as  specified in the Handbook, acting on all advisory decisions  received from the committees, initiating studies as it sees fit  and directing the appropriate committee to carry out these  studies, and reporting all of its decisions and actions to the  Faculty Council in a timely fashion. 
The Faculty Executive Committee shall be empowered to  make decisions on behalf of the Faculty Council. It shall  publish such decisions to the full faculty; decisions will take  formal effect beginning on the seventh business day after this  publication. The decisions of the Faculty Executive  Committee may be brought before the Faculty Council for
Page 11 
reconsideration by one of the following: (a) a simple majority  vote of the Faculty Council; (b) a majority vote by a faculty  governance committee, or other duly constituted committee  having responsibility in the area; and (c) upon the Faculty  Executive Committee’s own request. A simple majority of  those present and voting at a Faculty Council meeting is  required to override the Faculty Executive Committee. 
Further, the Faculty Executive Committee: 
• determines the agenda of all regular faculty council  meetings, 
• shall receive communications requesting Faculty  Council’s study, advice, or action; such items may be  placed on the agenda of the next regular faculty  meeting; 
• gives timely notice to each committee established by  the faculty that the committee’s report is due to the  Executive Committee; 
• may invite nonmembers, including guest speakers, to  Faculty Council meetings; 
• oversees faculty elections; 
• may appoint faculty to committees that have unfilled  positions; and 
• may be called upon to negotiate with the administration  on behalf of the faculty. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Executive Committee is composed of the  chairs of the following committees: Curriculum and  AcademicReview; Diversity and Inclusion;FacultyAffairs;  Faculty Evaluation, Promotion, and Scholarship; Faculty  Planning and Budget Committee; Faculty Research;  Grievance Committee; and Faculty Council(this chair also  chairs the Faculty Executive Committee). 
(i) Reporting 
The chair of Faculty Council reports regularly on the FEC to  the Faculty Council and to Core Faculty as a whole when  time requires. The chair meets regularly with the Provost  for communication and discussion of the issues before the
Page 12 
FEC and Faculty Council. Decisions and recommendations  of the FEC and Faculty Council must be forwarded to the  Provost for consideration, recommendation, and/or  implementation. 
(ii) Meetings 
The committee meets every two weeks or as necessary for  the conduct of its business. 
b. Curriculum and Academic Review Committee (CARC) (i) Definition 
The Curriculum and Academic Review Committee is a  University-wide faculty committee that deals primarily with  approval of new programs, ongoing review of existing  programs, and curricular consistency.“Curricular consistency”  refers specifically to that aspect of academic quality that  ensures that: course offerings are unique, that is, that they  avoid redundancy; that measurable differences exist between  B.A., M.A, and PsyD/Ph.D. courses; and that all curricular  changes are consistent with larger institutional goals. In  addition, CARC considers policies related to academic  standards for the University and to specific concentrations,  certificates, and specializations. In dialogue with the School  curriculumcommittees,CARCmaydeveloprecommendations  for administrative structures as they relate to curriculum  issues. It reviews and decides on: revisions of existing  degrees; deletions of existing programs, departments, and  degrees; and policies and procedures related to University wide academic standards, academic integrity, and academic  rigor. 
For the purposes of program review, especially the  
approval of the implementation of new curricula or the  termination of existing curricula, the University is guided  by the AAUP’s understanding of faculty governance in  Policy Documents & Reports, Tenth Ed. (Baltimore: Johns  Hopkins University Press, 2006, p. 139): 
The faculty has primary responsibility for such  
fundamental areas as curriculum, subject matter  
and methods of instruction, research, and those  
aspects of student life that relate to the  
educational process. On these matters the power  
of review or final decision by the President
Page 13 
should be exercised adversely only in exceptional  circumstances, and for reasons communicated to  the faculty. 
Faculty status and related matters are primarily  
a faculty responsibility; this area includes  
appointments, reappointments, decision not to  
reappoint, promotions, the granting of tenure,  
and dismissal . . . Determinations in these  
matters should first be by faculty action through  
established procedures, reviewed by the Provost  with the concurrence of the Board. The  
President should, on questions of faculty status,  as in other matters where faculty have primary  
responsibility, concur with faculty judgment  
except in rare instances and for compelling  
reasons that should be stated in detail. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Council selects half the committee annually  for 2- year terms to begin work at the beginning of the fall  semester. It consists of a minimum of 4 to 6 members  elected from the Core Faculty. The Provost is an ex officio  member. The committee elects its own chair from among  the faculty membership. A quorum consists of 3 voting  members. 
(ii) Tasks 
Engage in periodic program review and review proposals of  the following kinds: 
• Request for degree concentration revision or deletion, • Request for new degree approval, 
• Request for a new program or concentration of study  under an existing degree, 
• Request for certificate concentration or other course  grouping approval, 
• Request for noncredit program or concentrationapproval, 
• Changes in academic policies, procedures, or standards  (e.g., grading standards, standards for dissertations),  and 
• Changes in policies regarding academic honesty.
Page 14 
(iv) Reporting 
In the matter of program review the committee, the  department, CARC, and theProvostreach a joint agreement  about the review and recommendations. These decisions  are reported to the FEC annually. 
In the matter of academic policies, CARC makes its  recommendations to the Faculty Executive Committee for  review. FEC may return the matter or bring it to the  Faculty Council for discussion and recommendation. New  or revised policy recommendations are then forwarded to  the Provost for decision and implementation. 
In the matter of proposals for the addition or termination of  curricula, CARC reviews the proposals to assess academic  integrity and makes its recommendations to theProvost. 
(v) Meetings 
The committee meets semi-monthly or as needed. c. Faculty Affairs Committee (FAC) 
(i) Description 
The Faculty Affairs Committee (FAC) is charged with  recording the policies, procedures, and Handbook of the  Faculty Council and its faculty governance committees.  Additionally, the committee examines and recommends  changes and formulates recommendations and revisions of  the Faculty Handbook, which governs faculty employment,  contracts, and the regulations that govern faculty affairs. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Council selects half the committee annually  for 2- year terms to begin work at the beginning of the fall  semester. The committee consists of 5 faculty members  elected at large by the faculty. The committee elects its  own chair and recorder. 
(ii) Reporting 
On the matter of recommending changes in faculty work  conditions, the Faculty Affairs Committee reports to the  Executive Committee for review and recommendation. When appropriate, such issues shall be brought to the full  Faculty Council and/or be recommended to the Provost.
Page 15 
Recommendations for the revision of this Handbook are  described in section IX in this Handbook entitled  
“Procedure and Authority for Changing this Handbook.” 
(iv) Meetings 
The committee meets at least monthly or as oftenas  necessary to conduct its business. 
d. Faculty Evaluation Promotion and Scholarship Committee  (FEPS) 
(i) Description 
The Committee on Faculty Evaluation, Promotion, and  Scholarship (FEPS) evaluates and formulates guidelines and  instruments for instructional evaluation of the faculty. In  addition, FEPS addresses issues of University-wide  scholarship and research (except aspects that are the  purview of the Human Research Review Committee) and  recommends sabbaticals for University-sponsored faculty  research. Finally, the committee makes recommendations  for contract renewal and promotion for all Core Faculty  members in accordance with the policies and procedures  delineated in the Faculty Handbook. In accord with its  procedures, the committee may recommend for or against  promotion to the Provost. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Council selects half the committee annually for  2- year terms to begin work at the beginning of the fall  semester. The committee consists of a minimum of 4  faculty members elected at large by the faculty, at least 1  of whom from each School are senior academic faculty  with the rank of full Professor. The committee elects its  own chair. 
(ii) Reporting 
FEPS reports recommendations on changes in instructional  evaluation to the Executive Committee. Similarly, general  recommendations that pertain to faculty research and  scholarship are communicated to the Executive Committee.  The committee recommends promotions, contract  renewals, and sabbaticals to the Provost. 
(iv) Meetings 
The committee meets at least monthly or as necessary to
Page 16 
conduct its business. 
e. Faculty Planning and Budget Committee (FPBC) 
(i) Description 
The FacultyPlanning andBudget Committee (FPBC)includes six  members: both faculty representatives to the Board of Trustees  (BoT) Finance Committee, Faculty Council Chair, and three faculty  members. To foster continuity, the Chair of FPBC will be the BoT  Finance Committee Faculty Representative who agrees to attend  all BoT Finance, IPBC, FPBC, or other related finance meetings. 
• The FBPC monitors CIIS policies and procedures that directly  affect faculty lives and livelihoods at the university. In  consultation with the Faculty Executive Committee, it also  undertakes specific initiatives that seek to inform their  development and execution by the administration. This  involves information-gathering and sharing of budget-related  issues by FPBC members across several different institutional  bodies at CIIS including but not limited to: the Institutional  Planning and Budget Committee (IPBC)*; the Board of  Trustees Finance Committee; and the Faculty Executive  Committee (FEC). 
• The Faculty Representatives to the Board of Trustees Finance  Committee attend the FPBC monthly meeting as well as the  BoT Finance Committee meetings three times per year as part  of the Fall and Spring BoT meetings. 
• The Faculty Council Chair as well as two FPBC members will  regularly attend the bimonthly IPBC meetings. 
• At FPBC meetings, members will come together to share  information and identify and act on areas most relevant tothe  concerns of faculty. The FPBC Chair will communicate  activities to the Faculty Executive Committee. 
*IPBC is an advising body to the President and is Chaired by the  VP of Finance. The charge of the IPBC is to ensure that the  budget reflects the strategic initiatives of the Institute through  participatory review of budget planning and development. In  addition, the IPBC monitors the Institute’s performance against  the budget throughout the year.
Page 17 
(ii) Reporting 
The FPBC will apprise the Faculty Executive Committee and the  Faculty Council on their activities and recommendations. 
(iii) Membership 
The Faculty Council selects half the committee annually for 2- year terms to begin work at the beginning of the fall semester.  The FPBC is composed of 6 faculty members inclusive of: two  BoT Finance Committee faculty representatives, the Faculty  Council Chair, three faculty members. 
(iv) Meetings 
The FBPC meets at the start of Fall semester, after each Board of  Trustees meeting (3 regular meetings per year), and thereafter as  often as necessary to conduct its business. 
f. Faculty Diversity and Inclusion Committee (FDIC) (i) Description 
The Faculty Diversity and Inclusion Committee (FDIC) is  charged with reviewing and developing institutional policy  in regard to diversity in the academic areas and with  reviewing, developing and recommending programs to  enhance and promote diversity within academic life at CIIS.  The committee strives to promote diversity internally and  to increase accountability for diversity and mentoring  efforts. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Council selects half the committee annually  for 2- year terms to begin work at the beginning of the Fall  Semester. It consists of a minimum of 2 members elected  from each School. 
The Chief Diversity Officer is an ex officio member of the  committee. The committee elects its own chair and  recorder from the faculty representatives. 
(ii) Reporting 
The Diversity Committee reports its recommendations to  the Faculty Executive Committee. It works with the  Provost to implement the recommendations that have  been accepted.
Page 18 
(iv) Meetings 
The committee meets semi-monthly or as needed. 
g. Faculty Grievance Committee (FGC) 
(i) Description 
The Faculty Grievance Committee hears grievances brought  by individual faculty members alleging: a breach,  misinterpretation, or misapplication of the terms of  agreement in the grievant's contract; a violation of  University policy or procedure as set forth in the Faculty  Handbook; or an infringement of the rights of a faculty  member, as set forth in the Faculty Handbook, relating to  compensation, contract terms, academic freedom,  reassignment, non-reappointment, or denial of promotion. 
(i) Membership 
The Faculty Grievance Committee will consist of 5 Core  Faculty members elected by the Faculty Council for a 2- year term. Half the committee (3 members one year, 2  members the next) is selected annually by the Faculty  Council to begin work at the beginning of the fall semester.  The committee will include first and second alternates to  stand in for a member who cannot complete their term of  office or who might recuse theirself due to conflict of  interest. The committee elects a chair from its members. 
(ii) Reporting 
The Faculty Grievance Committee reports  
recommendations on changes in procedures to the  Executive Committee and the Provost. Recommendations  of specific grievances are made to the Provost and the  President. 
(iv) Meetings 
Meetings will take place as necessary. 
h. Faculty Research Committee (FRC) 
(i) Description 
The Faculty Research Committee (FRC) is charged with  maintaining, clarifying, and promoting the research policies,  procedures, and cultures at CIIS. Additionally, the committee  serves as an advisory body to the Deans and Provost,  recommending changes and/or developments in the interest  in promoting research excellence throughout the university.
Page 19 
(i) Membership 
At full capacity, the committee consists of faculty members  representing each research-oriented doctoral program,  recommended by their respective departments and confirmed  by the Faculty Executive Committee, as well as additional  representatives from the Center for Writing and Scholarship  and other stakeholders at the behest of the committee. The  committee appoints its own chair(s) and recorder(s). One of  the responsibilities of the chair is attendance at the Faculty  Executive Committee. 
(ii) Reporting 
The Faculty Research Committee reports to the to the Faculty  Executive Committee. When appropriate, issues and  recommendations shall be brought to the Faculty Chairs  and/or be recommended to the Provost. 
(iv) Meetings 
The committee meets at least four times each semester, or  more regularly when needed. 
i. Faculty Trustee and Faculty Representatives to the Board of  Trustees 
(i) Description and Meetings 
As a full voting member of the Board of Trustees, the Faculty  Trustee is a Core Faculty member who attends the regular  meetings of the Board of Trustees and other Board-sponsored  events and functions and serves on Boardcommittees. 
Faculty Executive Committee nominates candidates,  preferably three, for the position of Faculty Trustee; the  President will forward the candidates to the Board forreview  and the election of a Faculty Trustee. 
Faculty Executive Committee approves up to three candidates  for the position of Faculty Trustee. Faculty interested in  serving in this role will send a statement of interest and CV to  the FEC in March of each nomination year. FEC reviews the  nominations and brings forward up to three candidates to  Faculty Council for affirmation. The President will forward the  candidates to the Board, who will interview them and select  the Faculty Trustee.
Page 20 
Four additional Core Faculty representatives are appointed by  the Faculty Executive Committee to the Board of Trustees  Academic Affairs Committee and to its Finance Committee. 
(ii) Membership 
As delineated in the Board of Trustees By-Laws, the Board of  Trustees shall include 1 Faculty Trustee, nominated by the  Faculty Executive Committee for a 2-year nonrenewable term.  Additional faculty representatives to the Board of Trustees  include the Board of Trustees Academic Affairs Committee  representatives who include 2 faculty members from different  schools and the chair of the Curriculum and Academic Review  Committee as well as representatives to the Board of  
Trustees Finance Committee that has 2 members appointed  from the Core Faculty. 
(iii) Reporting 
Board of Trustees as specified and Faculty Council as  
requested by 
FEC. 
(iv) Meetings 
The Faculty Trustee attends the two day-long Board of  
Trustees meetings, typically held once in the Fall and twice in  the Spring. Faculty Representatives to the Board of Trustees  Committees (Finance or Academic Affairs) attend their  
respective Board Committee Meetings, held on Fridays of the  full Board meetings. [Faculty Representatives other than the  Trustee are non-voting members and act as liaisons between  their respective committees to both represent the interests of  faculty and communicate important functions and decisions  taken by the Board]. In addition, the Board Finance Committee  meets monthly for 90 minutes and the Faculty  
Representatives to the Board Finance Committee are  
expected to attend. 
C. Administrative Committees with Faculty Representation 
These committees serve administrative purposes within the  university but are ones in which Core Faculty serve. Service on
Page 21 
these committees isthe equivalent of service on faculty  governance committees by approval of the Provost. 
1. Human Research Review Committee (HRRC) 
(i) Description 
Faculty serve on the Human Research Review Committee  (HRRC) but this committee is an institutional committee  housed within the Provost’s Office. The Human Research  Review Committee functions as the University’s Institutional  Review Board and is granted the responsibility and authority  to review, approve, disapprove, orrequire changes in research  activities involving human subjects. To this end it acts to  assure protection of the human rights of participants in  University-sponsored research by both faculty and students;  assure that all research and sponsored programs involving  human participants are conducted in an ethical manner;  assure that CIIS complies with professional, scientific, and  governmental standards for research involving human  participants. 
(i) Membership 
HRRC is composed of faculty representatives from all  programs conducting research involving human participants  and one (1) staff member. The faculty at large elects  committee members for a term of two (2) academic years. 
(ii) Reporting 
The committee reports to the Provost on the number and  disposition of proposals it reviewed during the academic year. The  Provost provides Faculty Council updates on the quality of the  research and work with HRRC to recommend changes in  research policy or procedure to the+ Faculty Executive  Committee. 
(iv) Meetings 
The committee meets at least monthly or as necessary to  conduct its business. 
2. Academic Standards Committee (ASC) 
(i) Description
Page 22 
The Academic Standards Committee (ASC) is a University wide deliberative body charged with upholding CIIS’ academic  policies. The Committee works collegially with academic  programs to provide support for students’ success while  maintaining consistency in the enforcement of CIIS’ published  standards for good academic standing. 
TheASCpurpose,membership,andproceduresaremodeled  on best practices from other U.S. universities, which rely on  similar institutional-level committees to maintain academic  standards and to provide an equable forum for considering  
requests for exceptions to these standards, rather than to  allow students to negotiate with individual faculty or  administrators, a practice which creates disparities and  potential violations of policies and requirements. 
(i) Membership 
ASC is composed of three ex-officio administrators (the  Registrar; the Dean of Students; and the Associate Provost,  who serves as the chair) and rotating faculty selected through  the Faculty Council committee membership selection process.  At least one faculty member must be from a doctoral  program in the School of Consciousness & Transformation  since the majority of cases reviewed by ASC are SCT doctoral  students. One of the faculty committee members serves as a  representative to the Faculty Executive Committee (FEC). 
(ii) Reporting 
Information about each individual student reviewed by the  ASC flows to and from ASC and the academic programs via  communications with the student’s academic advisor and  department/program chair/director. 
Collective, confidential information generated by ASC is used  to report to the CIIS Board of Trustees (via the Provost and  the President) and to WSCUC on issues related to time to  degree and the University’s efforts to ensure timely degree  completion. 
(iv) Meetings 
ASC meetings are held twice monthly for one hour each  throughout the Fall and Spring semesters, unless there are no
Page 23 
cases to review. Documents relevant to each case are  distributed by the Registrar in the week prior to themeeting. 
3. Technology Advisory Group (TAG) 
(i) Description 
A consultative and advisory group on university  
technology. 
Mission: 
a) Foster technological advancement in the  
provision of IT equipment, software, processes,  
services, support, project management, and  
training by identifying and prioritizing long-term  
technology improvement initiatives (defined as  
requiring 100 hours or more of personnel time  
investment and/or incurring total costs of $10K or  
more). 
b) Situate the long-term initiatives within a  
technology strategic plan that identifies need,  
costs, budget commitment, staffing,timelines,  
milestones, assessment. 
c) Ensure congruence of the technology strategic  plan with the CIIS Strategic Plan. 
(i) Meetings 
Once every two months. 
(ii) Reporting 
Final decisions on the group’s recommendations are subject to  approval by the Institute Planning & Budget Committee (and,  when appropriate, the subsidiary Capital Projects Committee)  and the CIIS President. 
(iv) Membership (by role) 
1) Dean of Information Technology (Chair) 
2) Registrar 
3) Director, Institutional Effectiveness 
4) Associate Dean of Students 
5) Chair, East-West Psychology 
6) Vice President of Finance
Page 24 
7) Associate Director, Online Programs 
8) Senior Program Manager, Transformative Inquiry 9) Director of Admissions 
10) Associate Director of Financial Aid 
11) Systems & Reference Librarian 
12) Faculty Council Chair 
13) Director, Public Programs 
14) Director, American College of Traditional Chinese  Medicine; ACTCM faculty 
15) Director of Operations and Facilities 
Member Selection Process: Appointed based on one or more of  three criteria: 1) area of responsibility; 2) technology expertise  and/or knowledge; 3) constituency representation. Duration:  Two academic years, with possibility of renewal. 
4. Institutional Planning Budget Committee (IPBC) (i) Description 
The Institutional Planning and Budget Committee (IPBC) is an  advisory body to the President. Its charge is to develop and  recommend the annual budget to the President that reflects  the strategic plan and priorities of the University. In addition,  the Committee monitors the University’s performance against  the approved budget throughout the year. 
(i) Membership (by role) 
1) Vice President of Finance and Administration (Chair) 2) President 
3) Provost 
4) Controller 
5) Director of Financial Analysis and Planning 
6) Chief of Staff 
7) Vice President of Strategy and Innovation 
8) Associate Provost for Assessment & Compliance 9) Associate Provost for Academic Planning and Resources 10) Dean of Faculty 
11) Vice President of Institutional Advancement
Page 25 
12) Director of Operations and Facilities 
13) Chief Diversity Officer 
14) Dean of Admissions and Financial Aid 
15) Faculty rep to Board of Trustees Finance  
Committee/ChairFacultyPlanningandBudget  
Committee 
16) Faculty rep to Board of Trustees FinanceCommittee 17) Chair Faculty Council 
(ii) Meetings 
Meets twice per month in Fall and Spring semesters, and once  per month in Summer semester. 
(iv) Reporting  
President 
5. FACULTY WELLNESS COMMITTEE 
(i) Description 
The Faculty Wellness Services Committee (FWSC) provides  advising, strategic planning, standard setting, and consultative  resources to the CIIS Wellness Center. The committee  interfaces between the needs of those students who are  working within the Wellness Services in fulfilling career  development objectives and the opportunities to provide services to the CIIS community. The committee also functions  to support the integration of wellness initiatives across all CIIS  departments. 
The FWSC is designed to support CIIS in becoming a thought  leader in integral wellness within university settings and to  embody the ethics of CIIS in our wellness programming. It  serves to support the Center in broadcasting wellness  initiatives (e.g. health coaching and counseling sessions,  groups, classes, programming, community circles, and  workshops) at CIIS and encouraging engagement from faculty,  staff, students, and the broader community. In addition, the  committee advocates for faculty and staff wellness and  programs that support this (i.e. workplace wellness).
Page 26 
(i) Membership 
Four members serve from core faculty participating  professionally in health and wellness related scholarship and  activities from across the schools at CIIS, particularly from the  School ofProfessionalPsychology and Health (SPPH) as well  as the American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine  (ACTCM). 
(ii) Meetings 
Monthly, starting at the end of the Summer semester. 
(iv) Reporting 
CIIS Wellness Center 
6. Kranzke Scholarship Committee 
(i) Description 
The Robert Joseph and Wilhelmina Ann Kranzke Research  Scholarships are awards of up to $5,000 per year for research  and study of psychedelic/entheogenic plants or substances;  up to two awards may be made each year if appropriate  projects are selected by the Kranzke Committee. Scholarships  are for institutional tuition credit only and are not a cash  award. The research project can be made from a range of  perspectives, including psychology of consciousness,  historical, literary, ethnographic, shamanic, spiritual,  therapeutic, indigenous or traditional healing practices,  educational, and others to be determined by the Kranzke  committee. 
(i) Membership 
1) Frank Echenhofer (Chair) 
2) Sean Kelly 
3) Alfonso Montuori 
4) Janis Phelps 
5) Rick Tarnas 
(ii) Reporting  
Financial Aid
Page 27 
(iv) Meetings 
End of the Fall and Spring Semesters. 
7. Ad-Hoc Committees or Task Forces with Faculty 
As needed, the President, the Provost or Faculty Council  may request the formation of an ad-hoc group to work on  a specific topic. The requesting body proposes a mandate  as well as a start and end date for the group, which can  be renewed by FEC. In setting up an ad-hoc committee or  task force, the Description, Membership, Reporting and  Meeting Schedule are specific to that group and must be  specified to FEC by the group when formed. Core faculty  members serving on these committees may seek approval  from the Provost to request that this work count as  
faculty service. 
V. Faculty Duties and Responsibilities 
Membership in the academic profession carries with it  responsibilities for the advancement of knowledge, the intellectual  growth of students, and the improvement of society. The Core  Faculty have primary responsibility for such fundamental areas as  curriculum, subject matter and methods of instruction, research,  faculty status, and those aspects of student life that relate to the  educational process. Faculty members must order and evaluate  their activities in terms of their commitment to these goals, as  well as in terms of their own personal and professional  development. 
Moreover, all faculty of the University have a special obligation to  understand the nature of this institution of higher learning, and  to appreciate its unique characteristics, philosophy, and  objectives. 
It is expected that Core Faculty will be committed to building and  participating in a culture of scholarship and research at the  University. Core Faculty activities—which may involve off-campus  work that includes preparation for instruction, grading papers and  exams, scholarly writing, or other scholarly projects—should be  developed to support this commitment. 
Core Faculty members are expected to be fully available for
Page 28 
student advising, orientation, and meetings beginning August 15 of  each academic year. 
Primary Professional Commitment 
Full-time faculty members are those who have a primary  professional commitment to the University. "Primary professional  commitment" means that: 
1. The faculty member’s principal professional identification is as a faculty member at the University. 
2. Full-time faculty members are expected to make CIIS their  primary work commitment. Accordingly, they are to be  availableforassignedinstructional,governance,administrative,  and advisory duties a minimum of 4 full workdays during each  week. Availability of less than full time Core Faculty is pro rated accordingly. 
3. The faculty member’s commitment of available time in the  working week gives priority to the full-time academic position  held, above all other professional and/or work commitments. 
4. The faculty member supports the quality of education at the  University with appropriate scholarly research and professional  activities including: 
a. Faculty are required to keep their program chair or  director informed of all outside employment obligations  and activities. 
b. Faculty should inform their program chair or director  prior to any instance where a conflict between their  
primary responsibilities and compensated outside  
professional activities may arise and must receive prior  authorization. 
c. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Provost,  time spent by full-time faculty members on  
"compensated outside professional activities" must be in  addition to, rather than part of, the normal full-time  
effort expected of faculty members by the University.  The general guideline for time spent on such activities  will be the equivalent of 1 workday (8 hours) per 5-day  work week, or one course per semester. 
Faculty teaching in programs or departments other than the one  in which they are appointed must receive approval in advance for  these appointments from the Provost and Dean. 
A. General 
1. Faculty Workload
Page 29 
The University follows the guidelines of the AAUP’s  “Statement on Faculty Workload with Interpretive Comments”  (Tenth Edition, 2006, pg. 191), and specifically recognizes the  following principles in determining faculty workload: 
• Faculty should participate fully with the administration in the  determination of workload policy, both initially and in all  subsequent reappraisals. 
• Reappraisal of faculty workload at regular intervals is  essential, in order that long-standing patterns of faculty  responsibility may be adjusted to changes in the  
University’s size, structure, academic programs, and  facilities. 
• The most recent Faculty Handbook is available on the university  website. 
• Individual workload should be determined by, or in close  consultation with, the faculty member’s department or program.  Department chairs should be allowed latitude in making  individual assignments, in consultation with the Provost. 
• Care should be taken that all of an individual’s services tothe University are considered in determining workload. 
• Fair equivalents in workload should be devised for faculty  whose activities do not fit the conventional classroom pattern. 
• It should be remembered that Faculty workload means  teaching, service to University, service to the program or  department, service to the profession or discipline, and  scholarship. Workload units are given for teaching, dissertation  supervision, or special roles or projects. 
2. Adherence to University Regulations 
The material in this Faculty Handbook represents an attempt  to summarize University expectations that pertain directly to  the faculty. All faculty members have a self-evident  responsibility to adhere to the University regulations that  serve to promote the consistent and effective operation of the  University. 
Each faculty member has a responsibility to know these  regulations and to make every reasonable effort to adhere to  them. If questions of interpretation arise, clarification should  be sought from the Provost or the Faculty Executive
Page 30 
Committee. Any exceptions mutually agreed upon should be in  writing and signed by the Provost and all parties concerned. 
3. Academic Community Cooperation 
All members of the faculty should make a serious effort to work  cooperatively and in harmony with other members of the faculty,  academic programs other than their own, and administrative  offices. 
4. Deadlines 
Each faculty member is responsible for meeting the  appropriate deadlines established by their department chair,  the Provost, the Registrar, faculty governance committees,  and the University Bookstore. 
5. Institutional Presence 
Faculty are required to take part in major academic events  such as commencement and all University convocations. Faculty may also reasonably be called upon to attend  University social and extracurricular activities. 
6. Teaching 
The faculty set the requirements for the degrees offered in courses, determinewhen the requirements have been met, and  authorize the President and Board to grant the degrees thus  achieved. 
7. Advising and Availability 
Full-time faculty members are highly visible and readily  available for both formal student advising and informal  consultation with students during the times they are on  campus and standard business hours. 
8. Course Related Duties 
Faculty members are expected to meet their classes regularly  and punctually. If for some valid reason, a faculty member is  unable to meet a class, arrangements shall be made to offer  alternate instruction to satisfy students' expectations and the  individual's own contractual obligations. This can be  
accomplished in various ways, and the method to be adopted  shall be approved by the department chair. If more than 5  consecutive class days will be missed, then the faculty  member must obtain the approval of the Provost.
Page 31 
It is expected that a faculty member will return tests and  required papers to students within three weeks with  appropriate comment and/or grade and will meet University  grade deadlines. 
Students anticipating being unable to complete a course may  request permission from the instructor to receive an “I”  (Incomplete) grade; students who have not completed the work  required for a course are not to be given a passing grade in the  course without completing the required work. CIIS courses are  expected to be organized in a way that allows work to be  completed during the semester the course is being offered. Below  are the policies related to incomplete grades: 
1. Permission to be given an “I” grade is given only in the following circumstances: 
a. medical reasons documented by a health-care professional; b. a family emergency verified with supporting documentation;  or 
c. decision by faculty member based on exceptional  pedagogical reasons. 
2. The instructor has the right to refuse to grant an “I” grade. 
3. The Registrar’s Office does not record an “I” grade without  receiving an Incomplete Grade Request Form signed by the  student and the instructor by the grade submission deadline. This  form stipulates what coursework is remaining and its due date. 
4. The instructor, not the student, determines the deadline for  the remaining coursework. This deadline cannot exceed two  semesters (including summer) from the last day of the semester  in which the course took place and can be earlier. (For example, if  the course is in fall 2011, the student has until the last day of  summer 2012 to submit the work unless the instructor specifies  an earlier deadline.) The maximum deadline for an Incomplete  given for exceptional pedagogical reasons is one semester. This  deadline is not extended for students who are on a leave of  absence, become inactive, or refrain from registering for any  semester while the work remains outstanding. 
5. If the student does not submit the coursework by this  deadline, the “I” grade converts to an “IN” (Permanent  Incomplete). An “IN” is irreversible.
Page 32 
6. Students may not graduate with an “I” grade on their record  even in an elective course. Students may graduate with an “IN”  grade on their record, provided that if the IN was for a required  course, the student later successfully repeated the course. 
7. The submission of an “I” grade by an instructor does not imply  that that instructor will be a CIIS employee in a subsequent  semester. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain current  contact information for this instructor. 
8. Students may not sit in on a subsequent semester’s offering of the same course in order to make up the coursework. 
9. When submitting the remaining coursework, the student must  include a signed Grade Change Form. The instructor uses this  form to notify the Registrar’s Office of the final grade. 
Protocol for Tracking Incompletes 
1. The Registrar’s Office will produce a grade distribution  report for each program and the Provost at the end of the  semester. That report will be sent to the program chairs  and to the Provost. Program chairs are asked to discuss  and assess the circumstances with any faculty member  granting more than 20% of grades in a course as  Incompletes. Programs in which more than 20% of the  grades are Incompletes will be asked to provide a written  explanation to the Provost. 
2. Students are to submit the work and the Change of Grade  Form to the faculty member by the last day of the  previously agreed upon semester. Faculty members are to  submit the Change of Grade Form to the Office on the  Registrar to change an Incomplete by the deadline for  grades in the appropriate semester. 
3. If the Office of the Registrar has not received a grade  change from the faculty member at the expiration of the  default period of two semesters, the Registrar will  automatically change the Incomplete grade to a Permanent  Incomplete grade. Such automatic change will occur only at  the end of the default period of two semesters. 
A faculty member is responsible for establishing academic  standards in the classroom based on the curriculum of their  program’s curriculum, including expectations of academic
Page 33 
integrity and honesty. 
Faculty are expected to follow University policies on academic  integrity, absences and late work. However, individual members  of the faculty may choose to state stricter guidelines with  regard to absences and late assignments, provided that the  guidelines are not contrary to the University’s academic policy  with regard to individuals with a disability. It is assumed that  students will make the most of the educational opportunities  available by regularly attending classes and submitting  assignments on time. A faculty member may take such action  as deemed appropriate in the event that a student disregards  theannouncedregulations.Continuedorunexplainedabsences  should be reported to the Dean of Students. 
A faculty member shall not enroll or refuse to enroll students  in courses on the basis of their beliefs, or otherwise  
discriminate among them capriciously or otherwise based upon  considerations unrelated to academic performance. When  grades or other evaluations of academic performance are  required, a faculty member shall grade each student solely in  terms of academic performance. 
Faculty members are obliged to comply with all University  policiesprescribingnondiscrimination,non-harassment,and  non-retaliation toward students and other individuals. 
B. Service 
1. Share in Governance 
A faculty member shares responsibility for the governance of  the University. This responsibility shall be exercised by  regularly attending and taking part in meetings of the Faculty  Council, the governance and/or administrative committee/s  to which the faculty member is assigned or elected, the  faculty member’s School and program (by being available to  work with the faculty member’s School or program  
committee), and by performing any duties assigned. 
The faculty has primary responsibility for appointments,  reappointments, decisions not to reappoint, promotions, and  dismissal. Judgment In these matters is an extension of the  faculty’s responsibility for general educational policy.
Page 34 
a. Recruitment of Prospective Students 
A faculty member shall cooperate with the Admissions’  staff in appropriate ways, such as by inviting visiting  students into the classroom or laboratory, writing letters  and calling prospective students. 
2. Community Service 
Faculty are encouraged to participate in community service,  especially that which is related to their professional  
discipline. On- campus service includes summer registration  of new students, involvement in the University testing  programs, and emergency teaching or proctoring duties. Off campus service includes participation in civic programs and  social endeavors. 
C. Scholarship 
1. Faculty Development 
The faculty is the chief source of academic excellence for the  University. Thus it is expected that each faculty member will  endeavor to grow academically and professionally through  independent scholarship, participation in seminars and  workshops, and active membership in learned societies. Although professional development is the responsibility of the  faculty member, the University supports the development of  the faculty by means of the policies set forth in this section of  the Handbook. 
2. Faculty Professional Development Plan 
By May 1 every year, each faculty member shall develop an  individualProfessionalDevelopmentPlan (PDP)thatreflects on  the accomplishments of the past academic year and describes  the development goals of the next academic year. Elements of  the plan should meet the University’s requirements for  teaching,advising, service,andscholarship.ThePDPshalltake  into account the standards interpreting the scholarship  requirement developed by the individual School, department,  or program as well as those described in thisHandbook 
Illustratively, a PDP may include plans for: 
• Development of new courses, teaching methods,  
or examination processes, 
• Mastery of new subject matter or technologies,
Page 35 
• Research and writing projects and other creative work,  and 
• Service activities within and outside the University. 
The PDP shall specify the time and resources needed for  completion of the stated objectives. Each successive PDP shall  include a clear statement indicating the degree to which  progress was made during the prior year in accomplishing  previously stated goals, including an explanation of any  significant changes in the faculty member’s plans. 
In designing a PDP, the faculty member shall consult with the  department chair. Throughout the process, the consulted  administrator shall: be sensitive to the goals of the individual  faculty member; keep in mind the needs of the School,  program, and University; and be mindful of the institutional  resources that may or may not be available to support any  proposed projects. 
If the faculty member and the consulted administrator cannot  reach agreement as to the appropriate goals for the coming  academic year, both shall submit their documentation to the  Provost who will review the documents, consult with the  parties involved, and approve the final PDP. In all cases, a final  copy of the individual 
faculty member’s PDP shall be provided to the consulted  administrator. In addition, faculty shall retain copies of their  past and present PDPs and shall provide relevant PDPs to  persons charged with making decisions on retention,  promotion, and step increases. That data shall form one part of  the basis for evaluating the faculty member in those processes. 
3. Sabbatical Leaves 
Core faculty who have taught for 6 academic semesters are  eligible to apply for a 1-semester sabbatical leave. The salary paid  during the sabbatical is equivalent to the faculty member’s  current salary. 
Faculty who are eligible for sabbatical, or who will become  eligible by the end of the year, should submit a writtenrequest  to the Provost, their department chair, and FEPS by the date  specified in FEPS guidelines. The request should include a  description of any specific project for which support is being  sought and should be accompanied by a recommendation from  the individual department chair or comparableadministrator.
Page 36 
FEPS will review the proposed sabbatical activities and make a  recommendation to the Provost about the merits of the  application. 
During a sabbatical leave, faculty are expected to pursue  research or learning activities that will contribute to their  professional development and further the University's  purposes. They are expected to return to teaching duties after  the leave. Commitments to work on independent study  projects or dissertation committees that extend into the leave  period must be honored or continued. It is recommended that  sabbatical recipients offer a formal presentation to faculty  upon their return. 
The award of sabbatical leaves is subject to fiscal  
contingencies, staffing, positive evaluation of faculty  
performance to date, and support of the goals and objectives  of the sabbatical project. The Provost, therefore, considers the  recommendations of the department chair and FEPS in making  awards. Upon conferral of the sabbatical award, the  
department chair will make required adjustments to the next  years curriculum and faculty assignments. 
The semester in which a faculty member returns from  
sabbatical leave is included in the 6-semester count for a  subsequent leave. 
4. Research and Creative Development 
Faculty research assignment beyond the general faculty  development expectation may be negotiated based on actual  grant money available to the individual faculty member. Any  such requests will be based on specific projects resulting in  publications or other outcomes. 
Faculty may teach fewer units if they are involved in special  research projects and creative or scholarly activities that  warrant this reduction, provided they have the approval of  their department chair and the Provost. 
D. Ethical Responsibilities and Prohibited Behaviors 
1. Research Ethics 
Faculty members are expected to comply with the guidelines  and procedures established by the Human Research Review
Page 37 
Committee, which functions as the University’sinstitutional  review board and, as necessary, its scientific review  committee. 
2. Plagiarism 
Plagiarism is not unknown at institutions of higher learning.  Plagiarism is the practice of claiming or implying authorship—of  ideas, methods, or written words of another individual, inside or  outside the academy, including those of students—as one’s  ownwithout adequate acknowledgement.Plagiarizing someone  else’s work, particularly that of one’s students, is the antithesis  of honest scholarship, which is impossible without mutual trust  and respect among scholars. 
Accordingly, faculty should scrupulously recognize all  intellectual debts, whether ideas, methods, or expressions,  with appropriate attribution and acknowledgment. Any  suspected plagiarism should be reported to the Provost, who  will bring the matter to the attention of the affected parties  and, as appropriate, to the academic community at large. 
Faculty should comply with University policies and federal  law with regard to copyrights. 
3. Equal Employment, Educational Opportunity,  
and Nondiscrimination 
The University is an equal opportunity employer and is firmly  committed to nondiscrimination in its hiring and other  employment practices and in the application of its personnel  policies. In compliance with all applicable federal and state  laws, except where a bona fide occupational qualification  exists, employment decisions will be made irrespective of the  faculty member's race, color, religion, religious creed, ancestry,  national origin, age (except for minors), sex, gender identity,  marital status, citizenship status, military service status, sexual  orientation, medical condition (e.g., cancer- related or genetic  condition), disability, and/or any another status protected by  law. When necessary, the University will reasonably  accommodate individuals with disabilities if the individual is  otherwise qualified to safely perform all essential functions of  the position without undue hardship to the University. 
4. Faculty With Disabilities 
A qualified disabled faculty member who requires an
Page 38 
accommodation in order to perform the essential functions of  their position should contact the Provost and request such  accommodation. The University will then work with the faculty  member to evaluate the request. If there is an accommodation  that is appropriate under this policy and will not impose an  undue hardship on the University, it will offer to make the  accommodation.Forpurposes ofreasonableaccommodation,a  disabled faculty member is a person who: (a) has a physical or  mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities  (suchaswalking, seeing, speaking,learning,orworking);(b)has  a record with the University of such impairment; or (c) is  regarded by the University as having such an impairment. The  faculty member must meet the skill, experience, education, or  other requirements of the position that they hold or seek and  must be able to perform the essential functions of the job  either with or without reasonable accommodation. 
5. Prohibition of Discrimination 
The University does not discriminate in the administration of  any of its educational programs, admissions, scholarships,  loans, or other University activities or programs on the basis of  race, color, religion, religious creed, ancestry, national origin,  age (except for minors), sex, gender identity, marital status,  citizenship status, military service status, sexual orientation,  medical condition (cancer-related or genetic condition),  disability, and/or any another status protected by law. This  notice is given pursuant to Title IX of the Educational  Amendments of 1972, Title VI and Title VII of the Civil Rights  Act of 1964, Section 504 of The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and  amendments and otherlaws, orders, and regulations governing  discrimination. Any faculty member having a complaint should  contact the Provost. In addition, a procedure to resolve  grievances of faculty members regarding alleged acts of  discrimination is contained in this Handbook. 
6. Prohibited Sexual and Other Unlawful Harassment The University is committed to maintaining the community as a  place of work and study for faculty, administrators, staff, and  students, free of sexual and other unlawful harassment,  intimidation, and exploitation. The University does not tolerate  behavior that constitutes sexual or other unlawful harassment  of any member(s) of the University community. 
The University remains committed to providing an environment
Page 39 
free of sexual harassment and harassment because of race,  color, religion, religious creed, ancestry, national origin, age,  gender, gender identity, marital status, citizenship status,  military service status, sexual orientation, medical condition,  disability, and/or any another status protected by law. This  policy and procedure covers sexual and other unlawful  harassment. Prohibited harassment in any form, including  verbal and physical conduct, visual displays, threats, demands  and retaliation is unlawful and will not be tolerated. All  individuals shall be held accountable for compliance with this  policy. Individuals who believe they have experienced or are  aware of sexual or other unlawful harassment have access to  complaint investigation pursuant to the policy discussed below.  For further information contact the Provost, who shall serve as  the University’s primary officer responsible for supervising  resolution of complaints of violation of this policy by or  affecting faculty. 
a. Procedure for Resolution of Complaints of Sexual  and Other Unlawful Harassment and Retaliation 
The University is committed to a workplace and  educational environment that is free of sexual and other  unlawful harassment. As a matter of University policy,  sexual or other unlawful harassment of any member(s) of  the University community occurring in the course of any  University activity is prohibited. This policy provides  complaint procedures to assist the University in its efforts  to implement this policy. 
Harassment Defined. Harassment on the basis of race,  color,religion,religious creed, ancestry, national origin, age  (except for minors), sex, gender identity, marital status,  citizenship status, military service status, sexual  orientation, medical condition (e.g., cancer- related or  genetic condition), disability, and/or any other status  protected by law is a violation of this policy. 
Any such harassment of any individual in the course of  any University- administered program, job, or activity is  prohibited and will not be tolerated. The University will  take prompt and effective corrective action in response  
to harassing behavior, including, where appropriate,  disciplinary action up to and including dismissal or
Page 40 
expulsion. The policy explicitly applies to University  administrators, staff, students, and faculty and all other  individuals engaged with University activities. Individuals  who know of harassment, or believe that they have been  harassed, in violation of this policy have access to the  complaint procedures described below and are  encouraged to utilize these complaint procedures. 
All University administrators, staff, faculty, students,  contractors must adhere to this policy, and other  individuals involved in any employment, educational, or  other relationship with the University. 
b. Prohibited Harassing Behavior 
Harassing behavior, when engaged in on any basis prohibited  by this policy, may take a variety of forms. Examples of the  kinds of behavior that may constitute such harassment  include, but are not limited to: 
• Verbal conduct such as epithets, derogatory  
comments, slurs, or unwelcome sexual advances,  invitations, or comments; 
• Visual conduct such as derogatory posters,  
photography, cartoons, drawings, or gestures; 
• Physical conduct such as unwanted touching,  blocking normal movement, or interfering with work; 
• Threats and demands, such as those that seek  submission to sexual requests, in order to retain  employment or educational benefit, 
• and/or offers of job or educational benefits or  conditions in return for favors; 
• Retaliation, in the form of adverse employment or  educational actions, for good faith opposing,  
reporting or threatening to report harassment, or for  participating in good faith in investigation,  
proceedings, or hearings related to thispolicy. 
SexualHarassmentWarrantsSpecialAttention.Conductis  in violation of this policy when an individual's behavior  involves (a) unwelcome sexual advances, (b) unwelcome  requests for sexual favors, or (c) other unwelcome verbal,  physical, or visual behavior of a sexual nature. Also, such
Page 41 
conduct can become a violation of this policy and of law  when: 
• Submission to such behavior is made explicitly or  implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s  education or employment; or 
• Submission to, or rejection of, such behavior by an  individual is used as the basis for educational or  employment decisions; or 
• Such behavior otherwise has the purpose or effect  of unreasonably interfering with, or otherwise  creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive  educational or employment environment. 
Retaliation Is Prohibited. An individual’s good-faith filing or  pursuing a complaint under this policy or otherwise  reporting, complaining, or assisting or cooperating in good  faith with a complaint of harassment will not be the basis  for any adverse University decisions concerning a student,  faculty, or staff member’s employment or student position  or status. Such retaliation is forbidden by this policy. 
c. Presenting a Complaint of Harassment 
The University encourages students, faculty,  administrators, or staff members who know of  harassment, or believe that they have been harassed in  violation of this policy, to utilize the complaint procedures  described below in this section. A complaint should be  filed as soon as possible, if an instance of harassment has  occurred or is expected to occur. In all cases, a complaint  must be brought within the time limit of law. This  complaint procedure is designed to assist in the handling  of such complaints. The procedure is as follows: 
• Students, faculty, or staff with a complaint of  harassment are encouraged to contact the Chief  Diversity Director and Director of Human Resources,  Provost, or the Dean of Students as soon as possible  after an act of harassment has occurred. 
• University program directors, faculty, deans, and  department heads and officers each has a duty to  report in good faith any conduct of which theyhave
Page 42 
direct knowledge that they believe constitutes  harassment in violation of this policy. 
• A faculty member involved in a complaint of  harassment, whether making the claim or the  subject of an investigation, must participate fully in  the investigation and provide information to assist in  a prompt and fair resolution. 
• The individual(s) against whom the complaint is  brought and whose behavior is the subject of the  complaint shall be informed in a timely way of the  complaint and be provided the opportunity to meet  with those conducting an investigation to provide  accurate information. 
• All efforts to resolve complaints informally will be  made promptly and within 30 days of receipt of the  complaint. 
• If an acceptable resolution is not reached, or is not  likely to be reached, within 30 days or otherwise in  a manner necessary to promptly and effectively  correct harassment, the complainant or the  University may determine to resolve the matter as a  formal complaint, or the University may take  immediate action it deems necessary to effect  prompt and effective corrective action. 
• The complainant should ordinarily include details of  the incident(s), the name of the person alleged to  have engaged in the conduct complained of, and the  names of any witnesses and anydocuments. 
• A written report of investigation will summarize  information relevant to a determination of whether a  violation of this policy occurred and/or what, if any  corrective action the University should take. 
• The appropriate University officer designated by the  President will make a prompt determination on the  complaint. Promptly upon 
• reaching the determination, the University’s  determination will be communicated to the  complainant and to the person whose conduct is at  issue, to the extent and in a form deemed  appropriate.
Page 43 
• Corrective action may include disciplinary action of  the person(s) whose conduct constitutes violations  of this policy and/or who is otherwise responsible  for such conduct. Disciplinary action may include,  but is not limited to warning, suspension, or  
termination from employment or other affiliation  with the University. 
• In addition, a complaint of discrimination or  
harassment within the time required by law, with  the federal Equal Employment Opportunity  
Commission(EEOC),thefederalOfficeofCivilRights  (OCR), and/or the California Department of Fair  Employment and Housing (DFEH). Theirrespective  contact information are as follows: 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)  San Francisco District Office 
450 Golden Gate Avenue  
5 West, P.O Box 36025 
San Francisco, CA 94102  
1-800-669-4000 
Office of Civil Rights (OCR)  
Region IX, Federal Building  
50 United Nations Plaza,  
Room 239 San Francisco, 
CA 94102 
(415) 486-5555 
OCR.SanFrancisco@ed.gov 
California Department of FairEmployment and Housing  (DFEH) 
39141 Civic Center Drive, Ste. 250 
Fremont, CA 94538 
800-884-1684 (voice), 800-700-2320 (TTY) or California's  Relay Service at 711 
contact.center@dfeh.ca.gov 
Write to: 2218 Kausen Drive, Suite 100 Elk Grove, CA 95758 
7. Workplace Security and Anti-Violence Policy 
The University is committed to providing a workplace that is  free from acts of violence or threats of violence. In keeping  with this commitment, the University has established a policy
Page 44 
that provides “zero tolerance” for actual or threatenedviolence  on the premises or in the course of University business. Security and safety in the workplace is every faculty member’s  responsibility. It is therefore essential that every faculty  member understand the importance of workplace safety and  security. Every threat of violence is serious and must be  treated as such. Threatening behavior can include such actions  as throwing objects, making a verbal threat to harm another  individual or destroy property, displaying an intense or  obsessive romantic interest that exceeds the normal bounds of  interpersonal interest, or attempting to intimidate or harass  other individuals. Faculty who become aware of any threats of  workplace violence must report the threat immediately to the  greeter, who has been trained to contact the appropriate chain  of command. Compliance with this anti-violence policy is a  condition of employment and will be evaluated, together with  other aspects of a faculty member’s performance. Due to the  importance of this policy, faculty who violate any of its terms,  who engage in or contribute to violent behavior, or who  threaten others with violence may be subject to disciplinary  action, up to and possibly including immediate termination. 
If a faculty member becomes aware of any actual violence,  imminent violence, or threat of imminent violence, obtaining  emergency assistance must be a matter of first priority. The  
faculty member should immediately contact the greeter and if  appropriate, simultaneously contact San Francisco Police  Department authorities by dialing 911. Then the faculty member  must report the incident to their program director if the director  is available. Faculty may report any incidents of violence or  threats of violence without fear of reprisal. 
8. Substances Avoidance Policy 
(a) University policy promotes a safe, healthy, and productive  work and learning environment for all individuals at the  University, free from the influence of illegal drugs and from  the abuse of any controlled substance, including alcohol and  cannabis. The University prohibits the unlawful possession,  use, manufacture, distribution or sale by any person of illegal  drugs on University premises or in connection with any  University activity, regardless of the time or location of such  activity. The University also prohibits the abuse of legal but  controlled substances such as alcohol and prescription  medications on University premises or in connection with  University activity. Finally, any use of illegal drugs or abuse of 
Page 45 
controlled substances that endangers the safety or wellbeing  of another member of the University community, regardless of  the location of the event, is within the purview of this policy  and is prohibited. Such conduct is treated as if it occurred on  University premises and in connection with University  activities. 
For purposes of this policy, the following definitions apply: • "Illegal drugs" means drugs that are illegal under California  state law or U.S. federal law, except when they are used as  part of legally-authorized research. 
• "Abuse" means an intentional use that is illegal or that  
impairs the user's ability to fulfill work responsibilities or  
duties of reasonable care for self and others. 
• "Controlled substances" includes both substances that are  illegal and substances that are legal but regulated because  they are subject to abuse.  
• "University activity" means any activity in which faculty, 
members of the administration, or other University  
employees perform work for or on behalf of the University. 
If the use of a controlled substance is decriminalized under local or  state law, but that use nevertheless remains illegal under federal law, it  is an "unlawful use" under these policies. Although cannabis is a  controlled substance under California law, it remains an illegal drug  under federal law, and is thus an illegal drug under these policies. 
(b) Certain psychedelic and entactogenic controlled substances are  currently the subject of legally-authorized research and possible future  legalization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to assist therapy  and healing. The University is legally training professionals to perform  psychotherapy that is assisted by these substances once such uses  become legal in the United States. A variety of University classes thus  include discussions about these healing modalities and how they  operate. This situation creates a complex interaction of the University's  duties to observe both federal and state law, protect students from  undue or inappropriate influence by faculty or administrative staff,  preserve the professional reputation of the University, and  simultaneously promote effective professional training for the future. 
Accordingly, faculty and members of the administration can engage in  appropriate instruction and discussions related to these substances,  such as discussions about legally-authorized research results, the  therapeutic practices and skills that are needed for their most effective  use, the process of legalization, indigenous or traditional practices with 
Page 46 
these substances, and similar topics of appropriate instruction about  future legal uses of these substances. Such instruction and  discussions do not, by themselves, violate this Substance Abuse  policy. 
On the other hand, the actual use of these substances outside legally authorized research is currently illegal under state and federal law. For  that reason, they are "illegal drugs" and "controlled substances" within  the terms of these policies, except when they are used in legally authorized research. 
In order to protect CIIS students from undue influence by CIIS faculty  and administrative staff, and to avoid dual relationship issues, faculty  and members of the administration should not encourage or facilitate  unlawful uses of these substances by University students. Further, in  order to protect the professional reputation of the University and not  
exert undue influence on anyone, faculty members and administrative  staff should 3 not refer to or otherwise use or exploit their status as  faculty or administrative staff at CIIS, or allow others to do so, for the  purpose of encouraging or facilitating the unlawful use of such  substances by anyone. The term "unlawful use" means use of a  controlled substance in any location, foreign or domestic, which if used  in California would be illegal under California or federal law. 
(d) If a faculty member or member of the administration wishes to  engage in any activity that they believe is in pursuit of appropriate  educational or training goals, but which implicates or may be construed  to violate University substance abuse policies, prior to engaging in the  activity that person should review the issues presented with the office  of the Provost or the Provost's designate and obtain written permission  to engage in the activity. Failure to request and obtain this written  permission prior to engaging in the activity is a violation of this policy. 
(e) The University will not tolerate violation of the laws and policies  discussed in this section, and will impose appropriate discipline on  faculty and administration staff found to be in violation, under the  informal and formal procedures set forth in part VIII.F.2 of this Faculty  Handbook. If illegal activity is involved, referral for prosecution under  state or federal law is also possible. When substance abuse issues are  present and acknowledged by the person involved, appropriate  discipline may include a required program of treatment and  performance review. 
9. Romantic or Sexual Relationships; Other Dual Relationships (a) The University recognizes that romantic or sexual relationships  between any faculty member or member of the administration and any 
Page 47 
student presents substantial opportunities for actual or perceived  conflicts of interest, imbalances of power (and thus subtle or overt  coercion), miscommunication about consent, and favoritism, among  other possible negative consequences. For these reasons, the  University prohibits any romantic or sexual relationship, whether  regarded as consensual or not, between a faculty member or member  of the administration and either (i) a CIIS student, or (ii) another  University employee over whom that faculty member has supervisory  or evaluative authority, or can be reasonably expected to do so in the  future. "Romantic or sexual relationship" is defined to include any  relationship that a reasonable observer would consider to involve  dating or romantic or sexual intentions or actions, without regard to the  length of the relationship. 
(b) If the relevant faculty member or member of the administration  believes that unique factual circumstances make these policy  considerations inapplicable to a specific dual relationship (e.g., a  romantic relationship that began before one or both parties occupied  the roles that make the relationship problematic), they may request  review and written approval for the relationship by the Provost or the  Provost's designate. The Provost or the Provost's designate will  respect confidentiality considerations to the maximum degree that is  practical, and may require a management and review plan, or provision  of alternate teaching, supervisory, or evaluative authority, to reduce the  risk of unfavorable consequences from the relationship. The failure of a  faculty member or member of the administration considering such a  relationship to request and obtain this written permission is a violation  of this policy. Only under unusual circumstances will the Provost or  Provost designate consider giving permission for such a dual  relationship because it is inherently disruptive to a student’s  unencumbered course of study to have any dual relationship. 
(c) Other dual relationships are also potentially problematic. For  example, if a faculty member or member of the administration has a private practice as a psychotherapist, they may not serve as therapist  for either of the two categories of person listed in part (a), above. Any  other form of dual relationship that involves financial exchange or  exchange of services directly between the faculty member or member  of the administration and a person in either of those two categories  should be submitted in writing to the Provost or the Provost's designate  for review and written approval prior to initiation of the dual  relationship. The failure of a faculty member or member of the  administration considering such a relationship to request and obtain  this written approval in a timely manner is a violation of this policy.
Page 48 
(d) The University will impose appropriate discipline on faculty  members and members of the administration found to be in violation of  this policy on dual relationships, under the informal and formal  procedures set forth in part VIII.F.2 of this Faculty Handbook. 
VI. Faculty Appointment Policies and Processes 
A. Terms and Ranking 
Terms: This section contains the approved policies and procedures  of California Institute of Integral Studies concerning the terms and  conditions of faculty employment and is incorporated by  reference into each faculty member’s individual employment  contract. Where the terms and provisions of an individual contract  of a faculty member are inconsistent with the general policies  contained herein, the provisions of the individual contract shall  control. Otherwise, the provisions will remain in effect until  changed by the procedures contained in section IX “Procedure and  Authority for Changing this Handbook.” The Provost, the University  Planning and Budget Committee and the office of Human  Resources, subject to approval of the President, recommend  salary and benefit policies. Should there be any misapplication,  misinterpretation, or violation of specificprovisions in this section,  the faculty member involved should: (a) report the circumstance  to the Provost, another appropriate officer of the University, or to  the Faculty Executive Committee or 
(b) may file a grievance with the Faculty GrievanceCommittee
Page 49 
pursuant to the grievance procedures found in this Handbook. 
Ranking: There are three basic academic ranks at the University:  AssistantProfessor,AssociateProfessor,andProfessor.Thereare  also two non-ranked core statuses: lecturer and senior lecturer.  Faculty members are appointed at their initial rank depending on  qualifications and experience based on curriculum vitae, letters of  recommendation, references, teaching experience, scholarly  productivity, and other relevant information. The Provost may  consider professional experience in initial ranking decisions. 
The department chair shall recommend the initial rank of an  appointment to the Provost, who recommends to the President.  Ranks shall be determined by applying the criteria for academic  ranks stated in this Faculty Handbook. Faculty shall subsequently  be advanced through the steps within each rank depending on  length of service, evaluations, and academic and professional  experience evidenced by meeting the criteria in this Handbook. A  faculty member is eligible for consideration for promotion after  serving 5 academic years in a given rank, including sabbaticals. 
1. Criteria for Consideration for the Rank of Assistant Professor 
• A doctoral degree or its equivalent and at least 2 years  teaching or directly relevant professional work experience  combined with part- time teaching; or a Master's degree and  at least 4 years of teaching, or a combination of 4 years of  directly relevant professional work and teaching experience, 
• Scholarly contributions to a field of specializationthrough  scholarship as defined in this Handbook, and 
• Contribution to the field of specialization through  professional activities. 
2. Criteria for Consideration for the Rank of Associate Professor 
• A doctoral degree or its equivalent and further evidence of  career development in the area of specialization, 
• At least 5 years full-time equivalent (FTE) of full-time  college-level teaching or a combination of 2 years of directly  relevant professional work experience and teaching, 
• Continuing scholarly activities as delineated in this  Handbook, 
• Significant contributions to the field of specialization
Page 50 
through professional activities (presentations, etc.), and 
• Evidence of service to the University through service in  governance activities or other efforts on behalf of the  University outside of scholarship or professional criteria  above. 
3. Criteria for Consideration for the Rank ofProfessor 
• A doctoral degree or its equivalent and continued career  development in the area of specialization, 
• At least 8 years (FTE) of full-time college-level teaching or a  combination of teaching and directly relevant professional  work experience of outstanding quality totaling 8 years. A  maximum of 3 years of work experience may be counted  towards the 8-year total, 
• Continuing maturation of scholarly activities as delineated in  this Handbook’s section VI “Faculty Appointment Policies  and Processes,” (especially D, E, F, and G). 
• Significant and continuous contributions to field of  specialization through professional activities, and 
• Evidence of a leadership role in the governance of the  University or in other efforts of the University outside of  scholarship or professional criteria above. 
Faculty may be considered for promotion to a higher rank once  they fulfill the criteria specified above and have served 5 years  at their current rank. They may then apply for promotion under  the procedures and criteria described in this Handbook under  Criteria and Evaluation and Promotions and any further  
expectations described in the policies of the Faculty Evaluation  Promotion and Scholarship Committee and their academic  department. 
4. Special Appointment Faculty 
a. Department Chair Roles and Responsibilities 
The department chair is the academic and administrative leader  of the program. As such, the role of the department chair is one  of responsibility and authority involving matters of curriculum,  academic and nonacademic personnel actions and evaluation,  budget and expenditures, and planning and evaluation of  outcomes. The department chair is responsible for the use of all
Page 51 
program resources in an effort to achieve goals and objectives  identified through established program and University processes.  They are responsible for communicating the program’s needs to  the University administration. They are also responsible for  communicating University policies and administrative procedures  to the program faculty and staff. Leadership and commitment in  meeting the instructional, research, service, and developmental  goals of the program is essential. 
The Core Faculty in the academic program send their  recommendation for department chair to the Provost; a simple  majority is sufficient for the faculty recommendation. The  Provost makes the appointment based on the recommendation  of the Core Faculty. If, for compelling reasons, submitted in  writing, the Provost does not concur with the program faculty  recommendation, the Provost shall confer with the program  faculty and the nominee(s) and attempt to resolve the problem.  If resolution is not successful, the program shall proceed with  its nominating procedures for a second time and shall again  submit a nominee or nominees to the Provost. 
All department chair appointments are for 4 years and are  renewable. The department chair reports to the Provost and is  evaluated relative to program and University objectives every 2  years. Department chairs are given an annual stipend in  recognition of the complexity and the nature of the additional  responsibilities (including summer responsibilities) that the  person appointed is being asked to assume. Each department  chair also receives course release, usually amounting to 33% of  the normal CIIS teaching load (6 of 18 workload units); when  other release arrangements are appropriate, they are arranged  by a consultation between the Provost and the department  chair. When an individual leaves the position of department  chair to return to regular faculty status, the stipend and  administrative release time are removed. In rare instances to be  determined only by the president, a department chair  appointment may be terminated earlier than planned. 
Responsibilities 
The department chair has the following responsibilities: 
• Foster an environment that encourages and supports  faculty development and creativity within the goals and
Page 52 
objectives of the program and University. 
• Coordinate program planning and development and the  initiatives that arise out of those processes. 
Convene program meetings. 
• Supervise the evaluation of program faculty and staff as  required by personnel procedures. 
• Supervise the recruitment of faculty and staff in  accordance with programmatic needs and budgetary  parameters, and in keeping with the University mandate  for diversity. 
• Encourage currency and improvement in the quality of the  program’s curriculum and coordinate the plan for the 2- year cycle of course offerings. 
• Coordinate program’s student advising and mentoring efforts. 
• Hear grievances from faculty and students (as specified in  section VIII “Grievance procedures” in this Handbook, and  in the student handbook). 
• Coordinate program faculty workload assignment. • Ensure that the program’s instructional schedules are submitted as required and modified as needed. 
• Prepare and present the program’s budget to University authorities as appropriate. The department chair is  responsible for administration of programresources. 
• Coordinate the development, implementation, and analysis of the program’s evaluation of student learning outcomes. • Coordinate the self-study that is part of the regular  program review process. 
• Assign and provide oversight for program faculty working  with the Admissions Office to review applicants for  admission and recommend appropriate action. 
• Collaborate with Admissions to develop a recruitment  strategy for the program and represent the program at  Open Houses and information sessions. 
• Provide oversight for counseling centers that support the  academic 
• program to ensure effective coordination with educational  goals. 
• Monitor dissertations for quality. 
• Perform other duties as specified by the Provost and/or  other University administrators and carry out assigned  duties in accordance with CIIS policy.
Page 53 
Since programs vary in their characteristics and needs, the  priority given to each of the above responsibilities will also vary.  The department chair should consult with program faculty in  making administrative decisions regarding such matters as  workload, scheduling, curriculum, and budget. The department  chair has the authority to make timely decisions to administer  the program. Faculty have the right to appeal or request review  of any administrative decisions affecting them. 
b. Adjunct and Visiting Faculty 
Adjunct and Visiting Faculty are those persons who are  appointed to such titles in accordance with the relevant  sections of the Faculty Handbook. They are not members of the  Faculty Council. 
Adjunct faculty appointments allow the University to draw on  the expertise and skills of individuals who may have primary  commitments to other institutions or professional practices.  Adjunct faculty are contracted to perform specified services,  typically course instruction, but may include advising or other  program related activities. 
The University makes adjunct faculty appointments at the  rank of Adjunct Lecturer, Adjunct Senior Lecturer, and  Adjunct Professor. Qualifications for these ranks are  comparable to those for Core Faculty ranks. In the absence  of a doctoral degree, the candidate must have relevant  professional responsibility and achievement. The rank of  Distinguished Adjunct Professor may be awarded to a  candidate whose qualifications correspond with the rank of  Adjunct Professor and who has demonstrated distinguished  service in the professional field and outstanding teaching  performance. Persons may serve as adjunct faculty without  limit of time through successive reappointments. 
Departments and programs recommend adjunct faculty  appointments and reappointments according to the  procedures established by the Provost. Adjunct faculty  receive compensation only for those sessions during which  they receive a contract to teach. 
c. Professor Emeritus
Page 54 
This rank may be assigned to an Associate Professor or  Professor who has limited or ended responsibilities as a ranked  full-time Core Faculty member for valid reason (e.g., retirement,  illness) after 10 or more years of distinguished service to the  University. A Professor Emeritus is designated by the President  after nomination by the Faculty Executive Committee and in  consultation with the Provost. 
No compensation accrues by virtue of this rank. Emeriti  professor may be offered part-time term contracts to teach or  fulfill other duties. Any emeritus professor who returns to CIIS  to teach courses as an adjunct will be ranked at the full  professor adjunct rate. In such cases, supplementary benefits, if  any, will be set forth in the contract and such a term contract  shall be limited to less-than-half-time faculty status as follow: 
• Courses:Emeriti professors can enroll in and attend classes  for free, subject to space availability and approval from the  instructor. 
• Departmental Meetings: Emeriti professors may attend  departmental meetings. Each department may set its own  policies regarding voting rights and privileges. 
• Email: Emeriti professors retain their email addresses at  CIIS and are listed in the university email directory. • Identification Cards: Emeritus professors will be issued CIIS  identification cards by the Office of the Registrar. The mode of  address for faculty with emeritus status is “Professor X,  Emeritus” or “Professor Emeritus X.” Emeritus professors are  issued CIIS business cards upon request to the Human  Resources Department. 
• Library: Emeriti professors have full use of the library and  library resources. 
d. Visiting Appointments 
All visiting appointments are for a limited period of time on a  term contract with no intent of ongoing employment. Visiting  appointments are reserved for faculty members of other  institutions, professors emeriti, and persons distinguished in  their fields. Such appointments require approval of an
Page 55 
appropriate faculty committee and the Provost. Faculty  holding visiting appointments are not part of the Core Faculty. 
e. Artist/Writer/Scholar-in-Residence 
Artists, writers, and scholars may be appointed to the status  of Artist/Writer/Scholar-in-Residence. Such appointments  are made through term contracts that may be renewed at  the initiative of the University and require approval of an  appropriate faculty committee and the Provost. 
f. Replacement Faculty 
The University may appoint a replacement faculty member  using a full-time or pro-rata term contract. Service pursuant  to such a contract does not count towards step, promotion,  
or sabbatical leave unless, at a later date, the Provost  recognizes such service at the time of offering a Notice  Contract. 
g. Administrators with Faculty Status 
Administrators may have faculty status. Should  
administrators with faculty status resign their administrative  positions or there is a termination from the administrative  position, without circumstances involving misconduct by the  faculty member, they remain faculty members and retain the  rights and responsibilities that accrue with such status. A  member of the faculty whom the University appoints to an  administrative or staff position must understand clearly the  dual nature of the relationship with the University. An  individual holding both an administrative or staff position and  faculty rank is subject to the rules and regulations for both  appointments. 
B. Faculty Personnel Records 
Because appointment as a faculty member may lead to a  continuing relationship with the University, it is essential that  there be adequate and detailed documentation to support  official actions involving each individual, especially those  actions pertaining to appointment, promotion, step increase,  review for multiyear appointment, layoff, and dismissal. 
1. Official Personnel File 
Basic documents to be found in each core or adjunct faculty  member's official personnel file are maintained by the  Provost and the Director of Human Resources and include:
Page 56 
• Application 
• Transcripts 
• References 
• Personnel change records 
• Contracts 
• Step increase/promotion 
• Evaluation summaries 
• Disciplinary/personnel action records 
• Provost’s faculty records 
Department chairs, appropriate administrators, the Faculty  Evaluation Promotion and Scholarship Committee, and the  Faculty Grievance Committee will have access to the  Provost’s files, which shall include: 
• Current curriculum vitae 
• Instructional evaluations for most recent 10 quarters • Annual workload agreements for most recent 5 years 
• Written communications with department chairs  or other administrators 
• Copies of personnel change records and contracts for past 5  years; 
• Grant-related papers 
• Narratives and recommendations submitted in  support of all contract renewals andpromotions 
• Disciplinary/personnel action records 
• Miscellaneous materials pertaining to the faculty  member's activities (e.g., news-clippings, press  releases, etc.) 
Each program will also keep a current bibliography of  published articles, books, and other creative and scholarly  work by its faculty members. Faculty members should  update such a listing with the Provost each September and  deposit copies of any of their own articles and books or
Page 57 
other media with the University Library. 
2. Archives 
All files pertaining to faculty members who have not been  employed by the University for more than 3 years will be  archived. Instructional evaluation materials will be archived  after 3 years. 
3. Additional Files 
Department chairs, other administrators, or the Provost may  keep additional documents pertaining to facultymembers. To the extent that information in these documents is relied  upon to determine personnel actions, a copy of the  particular document or portion thereof is to be placed in the  official or School personnel files. 
4. Policies on Faculty Official Files 
The official file is confidential and is customarily available,  on a need to know basis only to the: President; Provost;  University’s legal counsel; the individual faculty member’s  department chair; the Faculty Evaluation Promotion and  Scholarship Committee; 
Peer Reviewers; the Director of Human Resources;  or other appropriate members of the University’s  community who are 
specifically designated in writing by the Provost. 
A faculty member may review the contents of their own  personnel files. When nonroutine documents are placed in a  faculty member’s personnel file, the faculty member shall  be given a copy or notified of that fact. 
A faculty member may obtain copies of any material in their  official personnel file. Any such copies will be made by a  member of the staff of the Provost or the Director of Human  Resources, who will understand and respect the confidential  nature of the file. 
The official personnel file will be kept in strictest confidence  and will be available for confidential use only to the  individuals indicated above. However, for a valid reason, the  faculty member may authorize in writing access to the file  by a person not indicated above. Further, the University may  permit access to and copying from such files, pursuant to
Page 58 
lawful requests and identification of federal, state, or local  agencies relevant to investigations, hearings, or other  
proceedings pending before such agencies or the courts. 
In any grievance or appeals procedure, the official file is  the major file of reference. University files may also be  used as evidence for academic accomplishment as  
appropriate. 
No anonymous or unsigned materials may be placed in  official or University’s personnel files. The faculty member  may at any time place a letter of rejoinder to any item in  their official or file. 
C. Contracts 
The University grants two types of faculty contracts: term and  notice. Notice contracts are given to Core Faculty, both full-time and  50 percent time. Term contracts are given to adjunct faculty, full time lecturer faculty and special appointment faculty members. 
1. Term Contracts 
Term contracts at the University are given to Adjunct Faculty,  Lecturer and Senior Lecturer Core Faculty, and Special  Appointment faculty members, and the employment is limited  to the term of employment stated in the applicable contract.  Faculty members with term contracts are not entitled to  continued employment after the term specified in the  
employment contract expires. 
Term contracts may also be used with full-time and pro-rata  faculty in special circumstances as follows: for replacements  for 1 semester or year for faculty on leave on a full-time or  pro-rata basis; or with the approval of the Provost for short term curricular needs of the University. 
2. Notice Contracts 
A Core Faculty member with a notice contract will apply for  reappointment in the academic year preceding the final  academic year of their contract term, and should follow the  procedures described in this Handbook under section VI.C.4  “Contract Renewal Procedure” and based upon the accepted  principles of criteria and evaluation outlined in sections VI.A,  VI.D, VI.E, VI.F, VI.G.
Page 59 
All newly hired Core Faculty, regardless of rank, will receive an  initial 1-year notice contract. Prior to the end of their contract  term, they will receive an evaluation by their department chair,  
who will forward a recommendation to the Provost; the Chief  Academic Officer will then make a recommendation to the  President for decision. Depending upon the evaluation, there  may be: no renewal (no further employment), a further 1-year  contract, or a notice contract will be awarded, the length  dependent upon rank. 
At the University notice contracts are given as follows: 
a. Assistant Professors 
The standard length of contract for an Assistant will be 3  years. At the end of each 3-year contract, if evaluation shows  that the faculty member is meeting Essential Criteria (as  outlined in section VI.D.2 “Essential Criteria for Teaching and  Related Activities” of this Handbook) and there are positive  recommendations by FEPS and the Provost and approval by  the President, a further contract of 3 years will be awarded. If  the faculty member has not successfully applied for  promotion to Associate Professor by the end of the  individual’s sixth year, the department chair may recommend  further 3-year contracts or a final 1-year terminal contract. If  the former, further contracts of 3 years will follow so long as  there are appropriate evaluations and positive  
recommendations by FEPS and the Provost and positive  decisions by the President. 
b. Associate Professors 
The standard length of contract for Associate Professors will  be 4 years; they will be evaluated by the end of the third year  of their current contract. If the evaluation shows that the  faculty member is meeting Essential Criteria (as outlined in  section VI.D.2 “Essential Criteria for Teaching and Related  Activities” of this Handbook) and there are positive  recommendations by FEPS and the Provost and approval by  the President, a further contract of 4 years will be awarded. 
c. Professors 
The standard length of contract for Professors will be 5 years;  they will be evaluated by the end of the fourth year of their  current contract. If the evaluation shows that the faculty  member is meeting Essential Criteria (as outlined in section
Page 60 
VI.D.2 “Essential Criteria for Teaching and Related Activities”  of this Handbook) and there are positive recommendations by  FEPS and the Provost and approval by the President, a further  contract of 5 years will be awarded. 
d. Lecturer 
Lecturer appointments are made in the School of  
Undergraduate Studies and American College of Traditional  Chinese Medicine and are not possible in programs offering  the PhD. Requests for a Lecturer position are made by the  academic department. 
Lectureship requests outside of these two schools would  require a separate proposal ratified by the Faculty Council. A  Lecturer holds a full-time renewable term position primarily  for teaching in an area of persistent programmatic need. In  addition to classroom instruction, teaching includes such as  activities as curriculum development, and advising; the  distribution of assignments is determined at the department  level. Lecturers are also expected to engage in service at the  program level or higher and in professional activity that is  appropriate to the discipline and that contributes to their  primary responsibility for teaching. The appointment is year round and includes a teaching load of 24 units or its  equivalent spread over three semesters, and carries full CIIS  benefits. The six units difference in the teaching load  between Core Faculty and lecturer reflects difference in  scholarship expectations. 
Lecturers shall possess superior abilities as teachers. The  ordinary educational requirement is the doctorate or other  appropriate terminal degree. In certain disciplines practical  
experience and credentials otherthan academic degrees may  be taken as equivalent preparations. 
Appointment is made for initial terms of one year. With the  approval of the Provost and the recommendation of the  department chair subsequent two-year terms are possible. 
e. Senior Lecturer 
Senior Lecturer appointments are made in the School of  Undergraduate Studies and American College of Traditional  Chinese Medicine and are not possible in programs offering  the PhD. Requests for a Senior Lecturer position are made by
Page 61 
the academic department. A Senior Lecturer holds a full time appointment primarily for teaching in an area of  persistent programmatic need. A Senior Lecturer shall have a  minimum of nine years of full-time teaching with at least  two of those years at CIIS. Nine year term includes number  of years adjuncts have already been working inthe program. A promotion from “Lecturer” to “Senior Lecturer”  needs to be approved by FEPS. In addition to classroom  instruction, teaching is defined to include such activities as  curriculum development, and advising; the distribution of  assignments is determined at the department level. Lecturers  are also expected to engage in service at the program level or  higher and in professional activity that is appropriate to the  discipline and that contributes to their primary responsibility  for teaching. The appointment is year-round and includes a  teaching load of 24 units or its equivalent spread over three  semesters, and carries full CIIS benefits. 
Senior Lecturers shall possess superior abilities as teachers.  The ordinary educational requirement is the doctorate or  other appropriate terminal degree. In certain disciplines  practical experience and credentials other than academic  degrees may be taken is equivalent preparations. 
Appointment is made for initial terms of one year. With the  approval of the Provost and on the recommendation of the  department chair, subsequent two-year terms are possible. 
For all ranks, in the case of an evaluation that is judged to be  not satisfactory and/or the faculty member has not remediated,  or is determined to not warrant additional time to remediate  serious or chronic problems, the Provost, after considering the  recommendation of the Faculty Evaluation Promotion and  Scholarship Committee based on the procedures described in  this Handbook, may recommend to the President the offer to the  faculty member of a 1-year terminal contract. The University  may impose a financial arrangement with the faculty member in  lieu of teaching or other duties in the terminal year. 
3. Issuance, Receipt, and Form of Contract 
All full-time and pro-rata faculty contract offers for any
Page 62 
academic year must be issued on or before June 1, and be  returned on or before June 30, or the first working day  thereafter. Unless a special arrangement is made with the  Provost, if the contract offer is not accepted on or before June  15 it will automatically expire on June 30. 
All term contracts are issued on an individual basis as the  necessity arises. 
4. Contract Renewal Procedure 
Faculty contract renewal is based on review of a faculty  member’s portfolio compiled over the year(s) of the contract  preceding the application year. The file will include a detailed  narrative explaining the portfolio elements brought forward in  the contract renewal process. The process is to be understood  in the context of faculty development, done in a climate of  peer assistance and review to help foster self-improvement  and the development of each faculty member’s unique skills  and strengths. While focusing on the current contract period,  the review may also address concerns and recommendations  from the previous contract period. 
Contract renewal will be based on the faculty member’s file,  which will include a table of contents, documents, and an  appendix. At contract renewal time, the Provost, in  consultation with the faculty member, will select 2 candidates  in the appropriate academic area from which the faculty  member can choose a Faculty Peer Reviewer. 
The Peer Reviewer will review the faculty member’s portfolio and consult with the faculty member. 
The Peer Reviewer will then meet with the department chair to  share information and views. 
Both the Peer Reviewer and the department chair will submit  letters to the Faculty Evaluation and Promotion Committee,  each giving an assessment of the faculty member and a  recommendation. 
The faculty member will receive copies of the letters of the  Peer Reviewer and the department chair and may provide a  response to them to FEPS if the faculty member desires to  with copies going to both Peer Reviewer and department  
chair. The faculty member’s response must be made within
Page 63 
3 weeks of receipt a letter from department chair or Peer  Reviewer. 
The Faculty Evaluation and Promotion Committee will make its  recommendation to the Provost based on the file that has  come forward. FEPS shall form its recommendations for the  Provost including reasons for concurring or disagreeing with  the Peer Reviewer and the department chair, its review of the  process, and an assessment of the application in relation to  the standards established by faculty in effect at the time. 
In the situation where the Provost is considering a  recommendation different from FEPS, then the Provost and FEPS  shall confer. FEPS may then request time to revisit its  recommendations before the Provost finalizes their  recommendation. The Provost shall forward their  recommendations to the President, including reasons for  concurring or disagreeing with the Peer Reviews and the  department chair, their review of the process, and an assessment  of the application in relation to the standards established by  faculty in effect at the time. 
If after the peer reviewer recommendation reaches FEPS,  additional data are discovered such that it can be reasonably  seen as having an impact on the recommendations of earlier  reviewers (department chair, Peer Reviewer, and/or FEPS) FEPS  or the Provost can return the portfolio with the additional data  for reconsideration. The faculty member will be given an  opportunity to respond to new data. If the contract renewal  decision cannot be immediately made, then the faculty  member should ordinarily receive a 1-year extension so that the  issues can be resolved. 
The President makes the final decision, and if applicable will  include reasons for concurring or disagreeing with the  Provost. 
For the purposes of Promotion and Contract Renewal the Faculty  are guided by the AAUP’s understanding of Faculty governance. Particularly important are these phrases pertaining to the  faculty in its statement on governance from the American  Association of University Professors, Policy Documents and  Reports,NinthEdition (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins  University Press, 2001), p.221:
Page 64 
a) The faculty has primary responsibility for such fundamental  areas as curriculum, subject matter and methods of  
instruction, research, faculty status, and those aspects of  student life which relate to the educational process. On  these matters the power of review or final decision lodged  in the President should be exercised adversely only in  exceptional circumstances, and for reasons communicated  to the faculty. 
b) Faculty status and related matters are primarily a faculty  responsibility; this area includes appointments,  
reappointments, decision not to reappoint, promotions, the  granting of tenure,and dismissal…Determinations in these  matters should first be by faculty action through  
established procedures, reviewed by the Provosts with the  concurrence of the board. The President should, on  
questions of faculty status, as in other matters where  faculty has primary responsibility, concur with faculty  judgment except in rare instances and for compelling  reasons which should be stated in detail. 
a. Additional Considerations 
In the process, additional information or clarification may be  requested at any level, once the file reaches that level. All  requests and responses must be made in writing. 
Other forms of peer review, such as those that might be  done internally in a department are expected to provide  written documentation to be placed in the faculty  
member’s portfolio. All evaluation members in thecontract  renewal process will have access to faculty personnel files. 
Copies of recommendations from each body or person go to  the faculty member, as soon as the recommendations are  made. 
D. Evaluation Criteria and Process 
The Faculty Evaluation Promotion and Scholarship Committee  shall specify in writing any additional standards to be applied in  the evaluation of Core Faculty, consistent with the criteria  described below. FEPS standards are subject to the ratification of  a majority the Faculty Council and the approval of the Provost. Schools or programs may also specify additional criteria or
Page 65 
specific interpretations of these criteria. Such criteria must be  published in writing and are subject to the approval of FEPS and  the Provost. 
The criteria for each of the three areas of professional review  (Teaching and Teaching Related Activities, Scholarly and Creative  Activities, and Service to the University, the Profession, and the  Community) are divided into two distinct categories: Essential  Criteria and Enhancing Criteria. 
Essential Criteria describe the nature and level of performance  required of all Core Faculty. Enhancing Criteria establish  standards by which faculty, following diverse career paths, may  be evaluated beyond the Essential Criteria. The department chair  and the Peer Review Committee play the central roles in  evaluating the quality of performance in each of these areas. 
1. Criteria for Teaching and Teaching Related Activities These include teaching in the classroom setting, advising,  mentoring, supervision of student research, clinical training and  fieldwork, the development of curriculum, thesis and  dissertation supervision, and any related activities involving  students. All faculty members are expected to keep abreast of  professional and intellectual developments through  participation in professionally relevant conferences, reading of  professionally appropriate materials such as books and  journals, interaction with practitioners in appropriate fields,  and communications with colleagues within and without the  University. All faculty members are expected to engage in  ongoing thoughtful and deliberate efforts for improvement in  teaching effectiveness. 
2. Essential Criteria for Teaching and Related Activities  Teaching will be evaluated in terms of four dimensions: (a)  Goals and Instructional Objectives, (b) Methods of Assessing  Student Work, (c) Teaching Practices and Modalities, and (d)  Affective Climate. 
a. Goals and Instructional Objectives 
• Academic goals and objectives should be clear and precise  such that they are easy to understand for students, other  faculty, and evaluators outside the University. 
• There should be congruence between course goals and
Page 66 
overall goals of program, School, and University. 
• Course objectives should have a clear relationship with  professional and academic goals of students. 
• Syllabi and course materials should include indicators for  how students, other faculty, and outside evaluators might  determine whether the goals are being met. 
• Objectives should make distinctions among expectations  regarding content, experiential learning, and practical  implementation. 
• The goals should be appropriate to the degree level of the  students admitted to the course. 
b. Methods of Assessing Student Work: Presentations,  Artifacts,and Documents Produced by Students 
• Student products should demonstrate that the goals and  objectives are understood and met. 
• The assignments should bear clear relationships to the  eventual academic and professional goals towards which  the course is oriented. 
c. Teaching Practices and Modalities 
• There should be congruence between classroom practices  andstated mission or values of the academic program. 
• There should be congruence between desired  outcomes and appropriate teaching practices. 
• Faculty should be sensitive to and account for varying  student learning styles. 
d. Affective Climate. 
• Students should feel that they could disagree with the  facultyand each other without adverse consequences. 
• Students should feel they can take risks. 
• Agreements about confidentiality should be maintained. 3. Enhancing Criteria for Teaching and Teaching Related
Page 67 
Activities There are many ways in which faculty may go beyond  the essential criteria for teaching effectiveness to enhance  their achievement; the following are illustrative, though not  exhaustive, of the possibilities. Faculty may develop innovative  approaches to teaching or exemplary ways of fostering student  learning in the classroom, in clinical settings or in fieldwork. Faculty may also be involved outside the classroom in such  areas as collaborative research projects with students, support  of student organizations, and/or recruitment and retention  activities. New curriculum, programs, or materials may be  developed, including electronic or multimedia software or new  advising materials or programs. Faculty may develop new forms  of assessment for student outcomes or teaching effectiveness.  Offering teaching colloquia or pedagogical workshops may  demonstrate leadership regarding instructional issues. 
E. Criteria for Scholarly and Creative Activities 
These include any form of professional, intellectual, and creative  contributions that are disseminated to appropriate audiences,  receiving favorable review from professional peers prior to or  subsequent to dissemination.These may include activities engaged  in as part of a 
faculty member’s teaching activities if the knowledge gained from these activities is appropriately disseminated. 
A faculty member must be a productive scholar, for scholarship is  an intrinsic element of academic life at the University. Scholarship  can take many forms, including journal articles, research  monographs, scholarly books, chapters in larger works, papers  presented at academic meetings, published instructional  materials, stage productions, art exhibits, musical compositions,  community engagement and development, mathematical and  scientific formulas, and software creation. Faculty are expected to  engage in a pattern of activity that demonstrates intellectual and  professional growth over time. All faculty are expected to produce  scholarly or creative achievements in one or more of the four  basic types of scholarship named below and drawn from Ernest L.  Boyer’s Scholarship Reconsidered (1990): 
1. Essential Criteria for Scholarly and Creative Activities a. Scholarship of Discovery 
Scholarship of Discovery encompasses those scholarly  activities that extend the stock of human knowledgethrough
Page 68 
the discovery or collection of new information. Such  scholarship seeks to confront the unknown, and typically  exhibits a dedication to free inquiry, disciplined investigation,  and the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake. The  Scholarship of Discovery includes, but is not limited to, what is  sometimes referred to as “basic” or “original” research. 
b. Scholarship of Integration 
Scholarship of Integration encompasses scholarly activities  that are primarily interdisciplinary or interpretive in nature.  Such scholarship seeks to better understand existing  knowledge by making connections across disciplines,  illuminating data in a revealing manner, drawing together  isolated factors, or placing known information intobroader  contexts. 
c. Scholarship of Application 
Scholarship of Application encompasses scholarly activities  that seek to relate the knowledge in one's field to the affairs  of society. Such scholarship moves toward engagement with  the community beyond academia in a variety of ways, such as  
by using social problems as the agenda for scholarly  investigation; drawing upon existing knowledge for the  purpose of crafting solutions to social problems; or making  information or ideas accessible to the public. 
d. Scholarship of Teaching 
ScholarshipofTeachingencompassesscholarlyactivities  that are directly related to pedagogical practices. Such  scholarship seeks to improve the teaching and advising  through discovery, evaluation, and transmission of  information about the learning and assessment process. 
2. Enhancing Criteria for Scholarly and Creative Activities  Faculty may enhance their scholarly and creative  
achievement with substantial records of peer reviewed  professional activities and products. Faculty may also  enhance their scholarly and creative 
achievement with editorial assignments with recognized  professional publications, including journals, newsletters, or  electronic media. 
Other achievements of this nature are appointments to  selection panels for grants, fellowships, contracts, awards and  conference presentations as are other adjudication
Page 69 
assignments calling for professional expertise. Additional  activities may be judged to enhance faculty scholarly and  creative achievement so long as they are peer reviewed, are  disseminated to appropriate professional audiences, and make  significant contributions to the creation of new knowledge. Despite their myriad forms, works of scholarship share  common characteristics that make it possible both to identify  basic types of scholarship and to assess the value of works  within the four categories. 
The process of Peer Review—called “refereeing” in some  academic fields—refers specifically to formal review processes  such as those used in the publication of manuscripts and in  the awarding of funding for research. Selected experts in the  same field as the author or applicant review the submission  and decide if it is authoritative enough for publication or  funding. The process assures that authors and applicants meet  the standards of their discipline. In this context the term peer  review does not include the Peer Review Committee making  recommendations for promotion or contract renewal. 
F. Criteria for Service to the University, Profession,and  Community 
Professional service may be contributed to the University, the  wider community, the profession, or the discipline. However,  activities outside the University must directly involve the  academic knowledge or preparation of the faculty member. 
1. Essential Criteria 
All faculty members are expected to participate actively in  the collegial processes of faculty governance (as described  in this Handbook) as well as in appropriate professional  organizations and activities. 
2. Enhancing Criteria 
Whatever the role, the quality of the service is the primary  consideration in terms of enhancement. Faculty may enhance  their service achievements in taking leadership and  
development roles. Authorship of documents, reports, and  other materials pertinent to the University and its governance  or procedures may comprise a service contribution. In addition  to campus governance activities, faculty members may  participate in community service to professional organizations
Page 70 
and in professionally related activities and through such  opportunities as committees, workshops, speeches, media  interviews, news articles, and editorials. Service to the  community may also include paid or unpaid consultantships to  schools, governments, communities or organizations. 
Meaningful service must be clearly related to the professional  capacities of the faculty member and be consistent with the  mission of the program and the University. 
G. Evaluation 
1. General Principles 
The process of evaluation should be seen as an integral part of  faculty development. The goals are to strengthen the faculty  member’s capacity to reflect on all aspects of their professional  life and to appreciate the relationships among them. The intent is  to assist the faculty member in identifying areas of strength and  areas on which they wish to focus in future development. Further, it allows faculty members to consider their individual  teaching, scholarship, and service in the broader context of  fostering students, collaborating with colleagues, contributing to  their program, and enhancing the overall University culture of  innovation, collaboration, and rigor. 
In order to present their achievements in the most coherent  intellectual and professional context, candidates are expected  to present a written narrative describing their contributions in  each of the categories to be evaluated. The narrative is  intended to serve as a guide to reviewers in understanding the  faculty member’s professional goals, values and aspirations for  professional, program, and University development as they  relate to the criteria. Patterns of change and development  should be described, reflected upon, and supported with  exemplary materials. All supporting materials should be  referenced and clearly explained. (See FEPS Guidelines for a  description of possible appropriate documentation.) 
While candidates are expected to meet the essential criteria in  all three areas, in evaluating the performance of faculty, the  University recognizes that each faculty member has different  strengths so that successful candidates for retention and  promotion need not have achievements that are necessarily  alike. Candidates who fulfill the requirements for
Page 71 
advancement may enhance their achievements in very  different areas depending upon their professional,  pedagogical,andscholarly interests.Candidates’narratives  should include an explanation of how they understand their  own achievements. 
Reviewers at each stage should both be aware of the possibilities  for variation and take into account the framework presented by  the candidate. 
The quality of faculty performance is the most important factor  to consider in evaluating individual achievement. Both essential  and enhancing criteria are evaluated in the context of their  service to the mission of the program and the University and  the professional interests of the individual faculty member. 
Nontraditional and alternative modes and forms of professional  activity as well as new media for dissemination or student  interaction are supported and recognized. Appropriate methods  of evaluation may need to be identified on a case-by-case  basis. External evaluators may prove to be particularly effective  for these assessments. When possible and appropriate, the  candidate may identify potential methods of evaluation. When  appropriate, candidates are urged to include such supporting  materials and standards from academic and professional  organizations as may assist in the assessment. 
2. Teaching and Teaching Related Activities 
The focus of evaluation should be on the quality of the  overall teaching performance of the candidate rather than  their performance ina few selected activities or over a brief  period. All teaching related activities must be included. 
Consistent with the emphasis on professional growth and  development that underlies the evaluation process, the  candidate’s narrative should discuss their teaching philosophy  and how it was formed and has evolved. In the narrative, the  faculty member should articulate a commitment to growth in  and engagement with both the teaching process and content.  The candidate should describe how they have been able to  make constructive changes in response to colleague and  student input. The faculty member should discuss and reflect  on their construction of classroom dynamics. 
Materials should include students’ evaluations (both
Page 72 
quantitative and qualitative) done at the end of the semester.  The candidate’s narrative should include reflection on these  evaluations, especially reflection on any area in which concerns  are consistently expressed. 
The following are considered to be indicators of effectiveness: 
• Appropriate and clear description of outcomes and student  activities should be evident in student products. 
• There is a congruence of teaching outcomes with  degree expectations and desired program  
outcomes. 
• There is a range of modalities employed in both individual  classes and in the full slate of classes offered by the  faculty member. 
• Student products are varied in the contexts of both  classroom activity and formal assignments. 
• Students are prepared for subsequent curriculum or  certification. 
• The faculty member shows capacity for the assessment of  student needs and learning styles and demonstrates  flexibility in relation to those needs. 
• There is a demonstrated awareness of culturaldifference. • Response to student work is both timely and of high quality. 
• Students’ evaluations are congruent with the faculty  member’s self- assessment and supporting materials. 
3. Scholarly and Creative Activities 
• Scholarship will be evaluated for excellence, expression,  innovativeness, visibility, and quality of peer review and  influence. 
• Consistent with the emphasis on professional growth and  development that underlies the evaluation process, the  candidate’s documentation of scholarly and creative activities  and the review of that documentation for the purposes of  review should focus on theconcept of progressive professional  development. Development should be 
evaluated in light of the candidate’s current or proposed rank.
Page 73 
These considerations should be the central organizing features of the candidate’s narrative. 
• Joint authorship or collaboration in scholarly and creative  activities is not only valuable and creditable but also  
consistent with the values and mission of the University.  Candidates should identify the extent of their participation and  discuss the value and meaning of such collaborations in their  creative and scholarly development. 
• Consistent with the objective of obtaining the best and most  thorough evaluation possible of the candidate’s scholarly and  creative achievements, external evaluations of the candidate’s  contributions to their field will be considered. 
• Unsolicited evaluations in the form of published reviews  will be considered. It is also appropriate to consider the  quality of review employed by the journals and publishers  disseminating the work. Citations of the candidate’s work in  other publications can also be viewed as a form of  
unsolicited review. 
• The solicitation of external evaluation of a candidate’s  contributions will be considered, particularly incircumstances  where there may be few peers on the faculty who are well  enough qualified in the candidate’s field to evaluate the  scholarly and creativeachievements or where content or form  are nontraditional. 
4. Service to the University, the Profession, and theCommunity 
• The emphasis in the evaluation of professional service shall be  on (a) the level of involvement and significance of the activity,  as measured by the degree to which the activity contributes to  the governance of the University or to the extension and  visibility of its mission, and (b) the extent and level of the  candidate’s involvement. 
• Assessment of the service both to the University and the  community shall be based on the information described in the  narrative as well as supporting evidence. Documentation may  include, but is not limited to, letters of support or invitation,  memoranda acknowledging the quality of the contribution, and  other applicable materials. 
H. Promotion
Page 74 
1. General Promotion Procedures 
Although peer review is occasioned by application for  promotion, its primary goal is to improve faculty quality through  self-reflection, in dialogue with one’s Peer Review Committee. The review is to be conducted throughout the various stages of  the process in this spirit of improving quality of performance  rather than attempting to ferret out perceived deficiencies. 
The Faculty Evaluation Promotion and Scholarship Committee  (FEPS) shall specify in writing any additional steps for  promotion procedures, consistent with that described below. It  is presumed that an applicant, when applying for promotion, is  also applying for a new contract. FEPS standards are subject to  the ratification of a majority the Faculty Council and the  approval of the Provost. 
Schools or programs may also specify additional steps. Such  expectations must be published in writing in advance and are  subject to the approval of FEPS and the Provost. 
• By June 1 of each year, the Provost generates a list of faculty  members eligible for promotion during the following academic  year and distributes it to FEPS. The Provost is responsible for  notifying those faculty members of eligibility for promotion  consideration. 
• If a faculty member (Applicant) elects to request promotion,  they must inform the Provost and FEPS by the first day of the  fall semester. The applicant is responsible for developing a  Promotion Review File with a self-evaluation statement and  supporting documentation (including publications and other  relevant materials) based on current University guidelines and  timetable provided by FEPS. 
• Within 4 weeks of the beginning of the fall semester, in  consultation with the department chair, the Provost appoints a  Peer Review Committee consisting of 3 faculty members: 1  selected by the applicant and the other 2 members selected by  the Provost, 1 of whom will be the chair of the committee. All  members of the Peer Review Committee must possess the rank  equal to or higher than the one for which the applicant is  applying. The applicant has a one-time option to reject 1 of the  recommended appointees made by the Provost to this review  committee; if exercised, the Provost appoints another member  so that there are 3 committee members. The Provost has a one time option to reject the applicant’s choice of a member; if
Page 75 
exercised, the applicant submits another faculty name. 
• At this time the Promotion Review File is forwarded to  the Peer Review Committee and the department chair for  consideration. 
• The Peer Review Committee considers the self-evaluation  statement of the applicant and supporting documentation as  described in section 
VI.D “Evaluation Criteria and Process” of this Handbook. The  Peer Review Committee will meet with the applicant to discuss  their application. The Peer Review Committee may at any time  request additional materials or revision of the narrative self reflection. Otherwise, the Peer Review Committee shall make its  evaluation of the Applicant solely on the basis of the  documentation in the Promotion Review File and the materials  in the applicant’s Personnel File. (The Personnel File includes  student evaluations). 
• The department chair considers the self-evaluation statement  of the applicant and supporting documentation as described in  sectionVI.D“EvaluationCriteriaandProcess”ofthisHandbook.  The department chair may meet with the applicant to discuss  their application. 
The department chair shall provide a written recommendation  regarding the applicant’s performance and readiness for  promotion. This recommendation becomes a part of the  Promotion Review File. 
• By a date specified in advance by FEPS, the Peer Review  Committee and the department chair prepare written reports  in accordance with current University guidelines that  document their decisions. The recommendations of the Peer  Review Committee and the department chair review will be  provided to each other and the applicant. 
• The applicant will be invited to discuss the report with thePeer  Review Committee at a subsequent meeting. It is critical that  all parties approach this process understanding that the  primary goal is to improve faculty quality performance through  reflective dialogue. 
• Theapplicantmay choosetowithdraw theirapplicationwith  no adverse consequences regarding the status of the  applicant’scurrent contract or possible re-application in the  future. If the applicant withdraws, none of the written
Page 76 
materials would become part of the Personnel File. 
• If they choose, the applicant then has 2 weeks to provide a  written response, rejoinder and/or rebuttal before they finalize  their reviews and make their recommendations.Such response  will be provided to the Peer Review Committee for  consideration before that committee finalizes its review and  become a part of the Promotion Review File. 
• By a date specified in advance by FEPS, the Peer Review  Committee and the department chair finalize their reports and  recommendations and send them to the applicant and to FEPS  along with the Promotion Review File. These reports,  recommendations, and Promotion Review File become part of  the applicant’s Personnel File. 
• FEPS shall review the applicant’s self-evaluation and  documentation and the Peer Review Committee’s and  department chair’s recommendations to ensure that  procedures have been appropriately followed. FEPS shall  assess the quality of the review and the recommendations of  the Peer Review Committee and department chair in light of  the standards established by faculty in effect at the time.The  goal is to ensure fairness and uniformity in the evaluation  process and the application of criteria for promotion. 
• FEPS may return the application to the Peer Review Committee  with requests for additional consideration, revision of its report  or for additional evaluative action. FEPS may at any time  request additional material or clarification from either the  applicant or the Peer Review Committee. FEPS may request  clarification or further documentation from the department  chair regarding their recommendation.FEPS also has the right  to consult experts, either from within or outside of the  University, for information that might aid them in their  evaluation. All such additional documentation becomes a part  of the Promotion Review File. Otherwise, FEPS shall conduct its  review solely on the basis of the materials before it. 
• FEPS may determine at this point that the application itself, as  presented, does not conform to the standards in effect at the  time and conclude the process without recommendation and  without adverse consequences regarding the status of the  applicant’s current contract or being able to re-apply in the  future. 
• FEPS shall form its recommendations for the Provost, including
Page 77 
reasons for concurring or disagreeing with thePeer Reviewers  and the department chair, its review of the process, and an  assessment of the application in relation to the standards  established by faculty in effect at the time. 
• By a date specified in advance, FEPS shall then notify the  applicant of its initial recommendation in order to receive input  from the applicant before making its recommendation to the  Provost. 
• FEPS then makes and forwards its recommendation to  the Provost for their review. 
• The Provost may return the application to FEPS with a written  request for further consideration or additional documentation.If  FEPS and the Provost are not in agreement, they shall meet in  an attempt to reach a common understanding of appropriate  action. If it deems appropriate, FEPS can revise its  recommendation or engage in further investigation and  reconsideration, including sending the application back to the  Peer Review Committee and/or the department chair. (This may  move the final decision to the next academic year.) 
• Upon the receipt of the final recommendation of FEPS,  the Provost shall make their recommendation on the  application. 
• The Provost makes the final recommendation in writing to the  President (with copies to the applicant, Peer Review Committee,  department chair, and FEPS) including reasons for concurring or  disagreeing with previous reviewers. 
• The President makes the final decision regarding the  promotion and informs the applicant of the outcome, and if  applicable will include reasons for concurring or disagreeing  with the Provost. For the purposes of Promotion and Contract  Renewal the Faculty are guided by the AAUP’s understanding  of Faculty governance. 
Particularly important are these phrases pertaining to the  faculty in its statement on governance from the American  Association of University Professors, Policy Documents and  Reports,NinthEdition (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins  University Press, 2001), p.221: 
a) The faculty has primary responsibility for such fundamental  areas as curriculum, subject matter and methods of  instruction, research, faculty status, and those aspects of  student life which relate to the educational process. On
Page 78 
these matters the power of review or final decision lodged  in the President should be exercised adversely only in  exceptional circumstances, and forreasons communicated  to the faculty. 
b) Faculty status and related matters are primarily a  faculty responsibility; this area includes appointments,  reappointments, decision not to reappoint, promotions,  the granting of tenure, and dismissal…Determinations  in these matters should first be by faculty action  
through established procedures, reviewed by the  Provosts with the concurrence of the board. The  
President should, on questions of faculty status, as in  other matters where faculty has primaryresponsibility,  concur with faculty judgment except in rare instances  and for compelling reasons which should be stated in  detail. 
• If the applicant disagrees with the final decision, the  applicant may then file a grievance according to the grievance  procedures setforth in section VIII, “Grievance Procedures,” of  this Handbook. 
2. Promotion Review Files 
The Faculty Evaluation Promotion and Scholarship Committee  shall specify in writing the contents of Promotion Review files.  FEPS standards are subject to the ratification of a majority of  the Faculty Council and the approval of the Provost. Schools or  
programs may also specify additional requirements. These  standards must be published in writing prior to the academic  year in which they are to be in force and are subject to the  approval of FEPS and the Provost. It is the responsibility of the  applicant to make sure that the promotion review file is  complete for this formal evaluation. Any additional materials or  evaluations solicited and acquired by any party to the  application process become a part of the Promotion Review  File. Any material placed in the applicant’s file must be copied  to the applicant. 
The review will also include documents in the applicant’s personnel file. 
These files are confidential and are customarily available, on a  need to know basis only, to the President, the University’s Legal  Counsel, the Provost, the department chair, the Human
Page 79