ICP/ICPW Student Program Handbook 
2024-25
Faculty & Staff 
Program Chairs 
Anna Benassi, Clinical Co-chair Sangeeta Swamy, Academic Co-chair 
Administrative Director Collin Eyre ceyre@ciis.edu 
Advising and Practicum Manager Mohi Khazaee mkhazaee@ciis.edu 
ICPW Program Coordinator Jill Heron jheron@ciis.edu 
ICP Day Program Coordinator Aaron Weiss aweiss@ciis.edu 
Core Faculty 
Liz Abrams labrams@ciis.edu Anna Benassi, abenassi@ciis.edu Leticia Brown lebrown@ciis.edu 
Nick Bustos nbustos@ciis.edu Jason Butler jbutler@ciis.edu 
Shanna Butler sbutler@ciis.edu Mark Fromm mfromm@ciis.edu Shubha Herlekar sherlekar@ciis.edu Emily Marinelli emarinelli@ciis.edu Emma Moonier emoonier@ciis.edu Avery AJ Phipps aphipps@ciis.edu Sangeeta Swamy sswamy1@ciis.edu Rachael Vaughan rvaughan@ciis.edu
2 
Integral Counseling Centers (ICCs) Staff 
Church Street 
Director: Debbie Stone, dstone@ciis.edu Manager: Vicky Spiers vjspiers@ciis.edu 
Pierce Street 
Director: Lisa Garbus lgarbus@ciis.edu Manager: Joseph Warner jwarner@ciid.edu 
Manager: Golden Gate 
Director: Kellen Grayson, kgrayson@ciis.edu Manager: Ashley Gallagher, jharris@ciis.edu
3 
Table of Contents 
Your ICP Program Handbook is meant to give you pertinent information about your program and what  you can expect from your experience in ICP. However, there are many facets of the CIIS experience that  are not included in this Handbook but which govern and regulate life at the Institute. Please be familiar  with the latest CIIS Student Handbook, the current CIIS Academic Catalog, and the semester Schedule of  Classes. These are official publications that detail administrative and academic policies and procedures. 
Welcome to ICP 6 Student Learning Outcomes 7 
Curriculum  
8 
 Curricular Content Warning 
10 
 Regarding Exploration of Self in Counselor Training 
11 
Getting Oriented 
12 
 Program Agreements 
 Essential Websites 
 New Student Orientations 
Advising 15 Registration information 16 
Important ICP/W Policies 
18 
 AI (Artificial Intelligence) Use  
 ICP/W COVID Policy 
 Personal Therapy Requirement 
 ICP/W Grievance Policy 
Other Course Related information 21 LMFT vs LPCC tracks 22 Graduate Level Writing 23
4 
Evaluation Thresholds 
 Clinical Evaluation Forms  2nd Semester Review  Practicum Approval  Practicum Evaluations  Professional Skills Form 
25 
Graduation Clearance 28 Appendix A: ICP Curriculum Flow Chart 30 Appendix B: ICPW Curriculum Flow Chart 32 Appendix C: Clinical Evaluation Skills form 33 Appendix D: Professional Skills Form 34
5 
Welcome to ICP 
About the Integral Counseling Psychology Concentration Founded in 1973 on the recommendation of Dr. Haridas Chaudhuri, the Integral Counseling Psychology  (ICP) concentration was the first transpersonally-oriented, “East-West” psychology graduate training in  the world. The concentration has evolved into the Integral Counseling Psychology Master of Arts  program, which educates future psychotherapists by centering student development in the three pillars of  psychology, spirituality, and social justice. Through experiential, contemplative, theoretical, and  transformative learning, students deepen self-awareness and hone clinical skills in coursework and  practicum placements. Inspired by integral yoga, the program aspires to develop graduates versed in  socially engaged spirituality, relational and liberatory approaches, and critical consciousness. 
  

In the context of a supportive community of faculty and students, the program offers rigorous clinical  training and psychotherapy practice, integrating experiential and theoretical approaches in order to deepen  the personal awareness of students. Graduates earn a Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology degree,  which fulfills all academic requirements for Marriage and Family Therapy (LMFT) licensure in  California. Students wishing to additionally apply for the LPCC license can do so by taking extra courses  beyond the curriculum’s requirements. See the section on LPCC licensure in this handbook for more  information. The M.A. in Counseling Psychology concentration in Integral Counseling Psychology is  approved by the California Board of Behavioral Sciences to prepare graduates for a professional license  or certification in California. 
6 
ICP/W Program Learning Outcomes 
Our department has developed a set of Learning Outcomes (PLOs) for you to achieve as you progress  through your Integral Counseling Psychology curriculum. These are both the standards for your progress  and the measures by which you can hold us accountable. We hope that you will use them as a self assessment tool by reading them over at the beginning of your study, reviewing them with your advisor  during your pre-practicum interview, and finally, reflecting on them as a basis for assessing  accomplishment in your last Integrative Seminar class.  
Although these are documented with our accrediting agencies and will not change during your  degree trajectory, this is meant to be a living and evolving list over time. We welcome your input in this  process. You may also contact the Program Co-Chairs who welcome your feedback.  
1. Master Clinical Skills and Competencies: Students will master and demonstrate skills sufficient  to serve as associate MFT or LPCC therapists at the master’s in counseling level. 2. Apply Psychological Theory and Philosophy: Students will gain a broad and deep knowledge  of theory and philosophy of historical and contemporary scholarship associated with the field of  psychotherapy. Through applying and critiquing a variety of topics, theories, and approaches,  students have an opportunity for a more in-depth mastery of a selection of these. 
3. Demonstrate Transformative Personal Growth: Through participating in personal growth  experiences in the context of the program, students will demonstrate self-knowledge, insight,  and emotional, cognitive, psychological, and spiritual growth. Students will apply this to their  preparation to work as therapists. 
4. Demonstrate Literacy in Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion: Students will actively explore,  observe, identify, and critique their own filters and biases, and seek to understand and accept their  own and others’ sociocultural and intersectional identities. This includes demonstrating the  impact of power, privilege, cultural humility, equity, and inclusion in the classroom as well as in  clinical practice. 
5. Synthesize Integral Theory and Philosophy: Students will synthesize the major themes of  integral yoga and spiritual philosophies with psychotherapy in the 21st century. Through  experiencing integral practices, students will reflect upon connections to their own personal,  spiritual, clinical, and professional growth. 
6. Develop a Relational and Therapeutic Presence: Students will develop and show compassion,  empathy, attunement, and mindfulness in classroom experientials as well as in their clinical work  in practicum sites. 
7. Demonstrate Professionalism and Ethics: Students will develop and demonstrate skills  consistent with the Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct from CIIS and various psychological and  spiritual traditions in the classroom, towards peers, staff, and faculty, as well as in clinical  practice.
7 
Curriculum 
The ICP/W program has been designed to include all of the educational requirements for a master’s  degree program as mandated by the Board of Behavioral Sciences (BBS), as well as include the unique  integral focus of the department. Students who complete this program are eligible to apply for an  Associate Marriage and Family Therapist (AMFT) intern number in the state of California. Students may  also elect to take additional coursework to gain eligibility for the Licensed Professional Clinical  Counselor (LPCC) license in California. The LPCC option includes twelve extra units of coursework. For  students in the ICP day program this can be completed in 69 total units. However, students on the LPCC track must replace their units of electives with LPCC coursework. For ICPW students the LPCC track can  be completed in 70 units provided they replace their units of general electives. Please note that extra units  of financial aid will also be required for the LPCC track and it may take 1-2 extra semesters depending on  availability of courses and your own schedule. In addition to the required components for licensure, each  course in the ICP/W curriculum is constantly being updated by faculty to balance foundational material  with the latest research, readings, spiritual practices, and clinical and social justice trends. 
The ICP and ICPW curricula consist of foundational pre-practicum courses during the first 3-5 semesters.  These include the courses marked in red on the ICP/W Flow Charts in Appendix A & B. Once these are  completed, students move onto the practicum stage of their programs, working in an approved community  setting and seeing their own clients while working with approved supervisors and completing other  required courses which deepen their skills. The Integrative Seminar then integrates all student learning  before graduation.  
Pre 
Practicum  foundational  courses  
Practicum  
Deeper  
coursework  and electives  
Integrative  Seminar 
Some courses are housed within ICP/W and some fall under the Master’s in Counseling Psychology  (MCP) umbrella. See the next page for a breakdown of required units. 
Note: ICP courses begin with the prefix ICP or MCPI. ICPW courses begin with the prefix ICPW. All  ICP, ICPW, & MCPI courses are managed by the ICP and ICPW program coordinators and ICP  Administrative Director. Please contact ICP/W staff and cochairs for questions regarding these courses  (email contact info is listed on page 2). 
Courses that begin with MCP are shared by all of our counseling psychology programs (Integral  Counseling Psychology, Somatic Psychology, Expressive Arts Therapy, Drama Therapy & Community  Mental Health) and contain a mix of students across those five programs. MCP courses are managed by  the Masters of Counseling Psychology Program Director, Jonalyn Blaha. For questions about these  courses, for more information please visit the MCP Sharepoint page or email Jonalyn at jblaha@ciis.edu. 
8 
Weekday program, MFT Track—60 Units LPCC Track- 69 Units 
Optional  
LPCC courses  
(12 units) 
ICP/W  
Integral  
Counseling  
Psychology  
Courses 
(13 units) 
Electives (3  
units)-LMFT  
Track only 
MCP  
Common  
Core Courses  
(17 units) 
MCPI  
Counseling  
Courses with  
an Integral  
Emphasis (21  
units) 
Practicum  
Courses (6  
units) 
Weekend cohort, MFT Track only—60 Units LPCC Track 70 units 
Optional  
LPCC courses  
(12 units)
ICP/W Integral  
Counseling  
Psychology  
Courses 
(14 units) 
Electives (2  
units)-LMFT  
Track only 
MCP  
Common Core  
Courses (17  
units) 
MCPI  
Counseling  
Courses with  
an Integral  
Emphasis (21  
units) 
Practicum  
Courses (6  
units) 
9 
Curricular content warning 
Throughout the program, you will be reading and discussing topics that may be disturbing to you and/or your classmates. We include this content for several reasons. Firstly, we believe it is vital to educate you  on a breadth of potentially traumatic events and their vicissitudes to prepare you to work as a  psychotherapist with clients who have experienced such traumas. In addition to building your knowledge,  this education is meant to expand your capacity to stay grounded and unflinching in the face of such client stories. This means that potentially becoming activated and learning how to soothe any personal activation  is a necessary and important part of the training process. Finally, we believe that building your knowledge  of the field, even its rough edges and problematic history, is necessary so that you may formulate informed  critiques of those theories or figures in the field you may find objectionable.  
We encourage you to scan through titles of readings and topics in each course and class. Faculty will do  their best to alert you to potentially activating topics. However, because each student’s background and  history is unique, it will not be possible for all potentially activating material to be flagged in advance.  Should you find yourself activated by a discussion or reading, we encourage you to first utilize your own  self-care practices, community network, and any university resources such as the Wellness Center to  address your own emotional and psychological needs. Second, we recommend you engage in intentional  processes to determine reasonable protocols that will allow you to still engage with future clients (who may  bring in such topics into sessions) with a strong, therapeutic presence. In other words, what steps can you  take to be an effective therapist when confronted with these very same topics from clients? These processes  may take place in therapy, in reflective practice, in spiritual practice or in consultation with a member of  your support network. If challenges arise, you are welcome to reach out to your professor or your academic  advisor for further consultation. Please note that you are still responsible for learning the material, and we  encourage you to frame your experiences as structured opportunities to practice the skills that you will need  in your clinical work. 
Regarding Exploration of Self in Counselor Training 
An integral focus of counselor training is the centrality of the self as an instrument of change. For the self  to be an effective instrument of change requires a high level of self-awareness. A client is at risk to the  extent to which their therapists are unaware of themselves and therefore unaware of ways in which they may do harm to the client. This is a primary reason that this exploration of self is necessary for the  protection of your future clients and for deepening competency. In addition, students, faculty, and  supervisors need to be mindful of the impact of self-disclosure on the learning environment. Information  and the manner in which it is shared are at the core of the learning experience and the development of  clinical skills.  
The exploration of self necessarily involves reflecting on one’s inner life and one’s life experiences. It is  appropriate that each of us make thoughtful choices regarding the extent to which, at any particular time,  we make personal disclosures to each other. The level of trust we have in others is a changing reality,  which must be taken into account in making these choices. Being self-revealing does not have to feel  comfortable to be safe. However, each member of a class must take responsibility for being attentive to 
10 
and vocal about matters of personal safety. Within the context of this class, everyone is responsible for  their emotional safety. The instructor’s responsibility is to ensure that appropriate boundaries are being  maintained. 
With respect to issues of a uniquely personal nature that could potentially cross the boundary between  being a student or an instructor in class, versus being client and therapist in counseling, the guiding  question must always be: Who does the disclosure serve: am I discussing this matter so as to further my  professional training or my client’s growth, or am I merely seeking to meet a personal need as if I myself  were in individual therapy? 
Many classes have a constant focus on issues that can be experienced to varying degrees as provocative,  complex, or emotionally charged. It is the belief of the program that it is essential for the growth of  counselors and the safety of future clients that these topics are addressed with deliberate attention and  care during the academic and training process. It is the responsibility of every student to monitor their  own levels of comfort/discomfort, and to take steps to ensure their own well-being while participating as  fully as possible in class discussions, readings, and assignments. It is recommended that any student  experiencing difficulty with class content seek prompt consultation with the instructor, their advisor, or  another faculty member, and if needed, with their therapist, who will provide assistance in successfully  navigating the academic context.
11 
Getting Oriented 
Program Agreements 
Each new cohort has a specific program agreement that outlines all coursework requirements that must  be met in order to successfully complete your program of study. During Orientation or your initial visit  with the ICP Advising and Practicum Manager, you will review your program agreement, ask questions,  and plan your course of study. When you are ready to graduate, the ICP Advising and Practicum Manager  will review your transcript and your program agreement to ensure that you have successfully completed  all required courses.  
The ICP/W flow charts (see attachments) are tools to help you visualize how you will take and sequence  your coursework semester to semester.  
• For ICP day students, the flow chart represents only ONE pathway through the program; there are  many possible options.  
• For ICPW students, your flow chart represents when courses will be offered for your cohort.  ICPW students do not have flexibility with regard to the order and sequencing of their courses  due to the highly structured nature of the program.  
The current program agreements and flow charts for both ICP and ICPW can be found on CIIS Connect /Sharepoint, under Documents tab, on the ICP program home page. See the following section for links  and where to find information. 
Please direct any questions regarding these to either the Advising and Practicum Manager. 
Essential Websites  
Sharepoint 
CIIS Connect on the Sharepoint site is CIIS’s online administrative portal 
https://ciisedu.sharepoint.com/sites/connect-icp. Log in with your CIIS email address and password to  access. Note that this information is internal and not publicly available on the CIIS website. Organized  by tabs for each department, through CIIS Connect you can view, access, search and download  information about: 
● Available Scholarships 
● Course Syllabi 
● A copy of this handbook 
● Program Agreements 
● Current Flow Charts 
● The ICP/W Program Page for dates, documents, important announcements  
● Forms for Registration & Practicum 
● The Field Placement Office’s online database of External Practicum Sites 
● And much more… 
The ICP Program Page on Sharepoint will serve as a valuable resource during your time in the program. 
12 
CIIS email 
Once you pay your deposit, a CIIS email address will be issued to you. The email will include your first  initial and last name followed by @mymail.ciis.edu (i.e. Student Jack Jones would receive the email:  jjones@mymail.ciis.edu). All information from CIIS, from ICP and any other office, will be sent to your  CIIS email address. It is therefore essential that you check this email frequently, at least once a day. You  are responsible for any information sent to that email address.  
Colleague/Elucian 
https://ciis-ss.colleague.elluciancloud.com 
Colleague/Elucian is the 2nd CIIS internal adminstrative system. Through Elucian you can:  • Register and Pay for Courses 
• View your Course Schedule and Grades 
• Track the progress of your degree 
• View the Course Catalog 
• View advising notes 
• And more... 
Canvas 
Canvas is the sole Learning Management System (LMS) supported by CIIS for teaching and learning. It  is a site where you can view your course syllabi, submit assignments, view grades and comments on  assignments, email your peers and instructor, view announcements, participate in web-conferencing (and  more). A Canvas mobile app is also available. Canvas can be utilized in face-to-face, blended/hybrid, or  online courses. All courses taught at CIIS will have an associated Canvas course space. However, not all  courses may utilize this space. This is up to the individual instructor teaching the course. Please refer to  your course syllabi. 
For more information or Canvas help, please visit https://ciis.instructure.com/ and check out the Canvas  Student Resources available. You are also welcome to contact the Manager of Online Learning at  onlinelearning@ciis.edu. 
New Student Orientation 
Our ICP Orientation follows the CIIS university-wide orientation each fall and spring. It is important that  all new students attend both the ICP and university-wide orientations. The CIIS Orientation will provide  important information you need to know about how things work at CIIS and will help you identify the  various departments to visit for assistance with your student needs. At the ICP Orientation, you will meet  our Program Co-chairs, core faculty and staff; connect with your peers, learn important tips and  information specific to our program, including expectations. The ICP Library and Writing orientation will  provide a brief review of the specific kinds of papers (Process or Self Reflection, Critical Reflection and  Theoretical or Research) and graduate level writing required by ICP.
13 
ICPW Students 
The ICPW Orientations will be held during the first fall weekend that the program is in session. 
Retreat Intensive 
ICP students 
At the beginning of your first semester, all new ICP students are required to attend a several day-long residential intensive. This retreat is usually held before classes start or in the first month. Roughly half of  one of your courses for the fall are completed at the retreat center. The remainder is completed on  campus. Fees for lodging and meals will be charged separately in addition to tuition costs. These can be  added to your financial aid. No alcohol or substance use will be allowed at the retreat and 100%  attendance is required.  
ICPW Students 
ICPW students attend a mandatory week-long intensive retreat each year during the month of August.  
Please note: Because CIIS must arrange advance contracts with retreat sites, exceptions for these fees  can be considered only in situations where students have a medical reason or family emergency,  supported by licensed professional documentation, to decline lodging and/or meals at the retreat site. 
Requests for exceptions must be submitted in writing at least one week in advance of the retreat to the  ICP Program Coordinator or ICPW Program Coordinator. Approval for an exemption from retreat site  lodging and/or meals does not guarantee approval by the Financial Petition Committee (FPC) of an  exemption from fee payment. Refund requests can be submitted to the FPC within ninety days of the last  day of the retreat by completing a Financial Petition Form found on the Student Affairs website.  
Retreats offer bonding and community for all students, as well as intensive opportunities for learning.  Students have reported to us that these informal settings, such as eating together with faculty and other  peers, as well as living together and socializing with peers, to be invaluable in their student experience.  The building of relationships in retreat settings between students also helps to support more trust, sharing,  and reflexive and reflective learning in the classroom. In addition, the intensive format of multiple classes  in a row provides a rare opportunity for deepening theoretical, experiential components of student  learning, including classroom discussions, dyads, and creative activities. 
14 
Advising 
Academic Advising 
The ICP Advising and Practicum Manager will help you with any questions you have about course  selection and registration, preparing for practicum, selecting a supervisor, and graduation. The ICP  Advising and Practicum Manager works closely with our faculty advisors to ensure that all students are  on target toward completing their program goals. Students are required to schedule an advising session  with the ICP Advising and Practicum Manager before registering for classes at the beginning of their first  semester. The ICP Advising and Practicum Manager is also available to help you with any concerns about  practicum and offers workshops each fall and spring that cover all the ins and outs of the process.  Students are required to attend the Practicum 101 workshop before applying for practicum approval and  the Practicum 102 workshop once they have been accepted to a practicum site (before starting practicum).  The ICP Advising and Practicum Manager also offers a graduation workshop that we encourage all ICP  students to attend during their last semester in the program. 
  
Faculty Advisors  
Each student is automatically assigned a faculty academic advisor. Your faculty advisor is available to  provide support both personally and professionally as you work your way through the program. Your  faculty advisor can help familiarize you to the university processes and culture, connect you to university  resources such as the counseling center, navigate a Title IX or VI issue related to harrassment, sexual  abuse or discrimination, help direct you to appropriate offices if you need a leave of absence for instance,  be a mentor for professional questions, or help you navigate a grievance. Your faculty advisor plays a  valuable role in many processes outlined in the CIIS student handbook and is an important advocate for  you. Some students will utilize more support from their faculty advisor, and some students may prefer to  work more independently. We recommend that students meet with their faculty advisor a minimum of  two times during the program, first for an initial meeting sometime during the 1st year to get to know  your advisor and second for a practicum readiness consultation, which is required. During the required  practicum readiness consultation, your advisor will discuss your clinical skills, practicum readiness, and  any other issues pertaining to your preparation to start seeing clients. They may also help you explore  your specific interests and discuss possible placement considerations. Although we specify these two  meeting times, we encourage you to meet with your faculty advisor any time you feel you need additional  support during the program.  
If you would like to switch faculty advisors please contact the Advising and Practicum Manager for  details on the process.
15 
Registration 
What courses should I take? 
We ask that all new full-time ICP students register for the following four courses (10 units) their first  semester: 
· Multicultural Counseling and the Family 
· Therapeutic Communication  
· Psychodynamics 
· Integral Yoga 
Day program students are allowed some flexibility in their course sequencing but are encouraged to  intersperse experiential and lecture-oriented classes so as not to have more than one or two experiential  classes in a semester.  
Research Methods and Group Dynamics is not recommended for first-year students. 
Couples Counseling is not recommended for first-semester students but must be taken before students are  allowed to see couples in practicum. 
Family Dynamics and Therapy may not be taken in the first semester. 
See the flowcharts for a suggested flow chart of courses. 
ICPW Students  
The ICPW program has been designed with all of these recommendations in mind. See the flow chart in Appendix B for more information.  
Registration & Class Schedule 
It is important to begin to familiarize yourself with the Registrar’s Office and the various policies,  deadlines and forms you will be expected to follow and use during your course of study. Official policies  are provided in the Academic Catalog, which is published on the CIIS website. The Academic Calendar,  which contains many important semester deadlines, is published on the public CIIS website  (https://www.ciis.edu/academics/academic-calendar). Class schedules are published online twice a year,  once for the spring semester and once for the combined summer and fall semesters. Check the Academic  Calendar to see when the class schedule will be posted for each semester. Each semester’s schedule of  courses for all programs can be found in Colleague Self-Service by clicking the Course Catalog tile.  Online registration instructions are published on the Registrar’s page on SharePoint.  
Course Prerequisites 
Many of our courses have prerequisites. Please be sure to review the prerequisites for each course when  planning each semester to ensure you have met the requirements before registering. Please note: the ICPW curriculum is structured so that all prerequisites are completed in proper sequence. 
16 
Pre-practicum Course Requirements 
The following courses must be successfully completed before you can apply for practicum approval. It is  recommended that students take these classes as early as possible in the program: 
· Gestalt Therapy 
· Professional Ethics and Family Law┼ 
· Psychopathology and Psychological Assessment┼ 
· Human Development & the Family 
· Psychodynamics 
· The Clinical Relationship 
· Therapeutic Communication 
· Family Dynamics and Therapy 
· Multicultural Counseling and the Family 
· Integral Philosophy, Meditation, and Yoga in the 21st Century 
┼ Professional Ethics and Family Law, and Psychopathology & Psychological Assessment may be taken while  applying for practicum approval but must be successfully completed before starting practicum. 
Authorized Early Registration  
Students may be allowed authorized early enrollment for classes if one of the following two cases apply:  
• The student needs the class in order to apply for practicum approval the next semester. • The student needs the class in order to graduate that semester. 
Students must meet with the Advising and Practicum Manager in order to determine eligibility and  receive approval for priority enrollment. If priority enrollment is approved, the Advising and Practicum  Manager must sign a Priority Registration Form. Priority registration may not be conducted online.  Authorized Early Registration opens one week before standard registration begins each semester and remains open until standard registration begins. Students are responsible for checking the Academic  Calendar for registration dates and arranging to meet with the Advising and Practicum Manager for the  necessary approvals before priority enrollment opens.  
Please note: A phone message or written note is not considered to be adequate consultation with the  academic advisor. You must meet in person or on Zoom.  
Grading Options 
Most classes in the program are offered for a grade of Pass or No-Pass only (P/NP). Some are offered for  a letter grade (LG) or with the option of either P/NP or LG (OP). If your course is listed as OP, you must  select your preferred grading option when registering. Courses that are listed as OP will default to a letter  grade after the semester add/drop deadline if you have not emailed registrar@ciis.edu to request  
otherwise. Please note: There is no way to adjust grading options once the add/drop deadline has passed. 
Transfer Units 
It is possible to satisfy up to 1/6 of your degree requirements through approved coursework taken at  another accredited graduate institution. For more information and coursework approval, consult with the  Advising and Practicum Manager. Review the most recent General Catalog for more information and  guidelines.
17 
Integrative Seminar 
Integrative Seminar is considered our capstone course – the culminating class in which we see how you  have integrated your learnings from throughout your time in the program. Students must have completed  at least one semester of practicum before enrolling in this course because course requirements call for the  articulation of actual case material to practice and demonstrate this integration.  
General Electives 
Students may take their elective units from any other graduate program at CIIS. However, each program  determines whether its courses are open to students from other programs. If you are considering an  elective outside our program, please check with the host program to make sure it is open to ICP students.  
Leave of Absence 
Students not planning to enroll for a semester should review the “Maintaining Active Student Status”  section in the Academic Catalog to determine whether a leave of absence (LOA) is necessary. The  Academic Catalog can be found on the CIIS website (www.ciis.edu) under Academics/Academic  Catalog.  
To be granted a LOA, submit a Leave of Absence Form, signed by your faculty advisor and approved by  the Program Co-Chairs, to the Registrar’s Office. Financial aid recipients also need a signature from the  Financial Aid Office, and F-1 or J-1 visa holders also need a signature from the International Student  Advisor.
18 
Important ICP/W Policies 
AI and updated academic integrity policy  
Because students come from many different backgrounds and have varied experiences around AI,  ChatGPT, and other forms of artificial intelligence, we want to reiterate the updated CIIS policy of  academic integrity in the 24-25 CIIS catalog which now requires any AI use in all work for classes to be  acknowledged and cited. All work submitted in a course should be produced without the aid of  unsanctioned AI tools. In other words, while you may choose to use AI tools to, for example, search for  information or format references in APA style, all work submitted must be entirely your own, including  translations, and should not be copied directly from AI generated sources to avoid violating standards of  academic integrity. If you have any doubts about what is considered acceptable use, please review the  policy in the catalog and discuss with your instructors. 
ICP/W COVID Policy  
Students who have tested positive for COVID should not come to campus and should follow CDC  guidelines for isolation. Due to the fact that we are only accredited as an in-person program, only students  who have covid or have an accommodation from OSAS will be allowed to zoom in. (Note that students  should not share zoom links with other students). If a student has any questions about COVID exposure, they should consult with their instructor before returning to in person or zooming in. See the CDC  website for more information. 
Personal Psychotherapy Therapy Requirement  
Students are required to receive individual (virtual or in-person psychotherapy) with a licensed clinician  (MFT, psychologist, psychiatrist, LCSW, or AMFT with 2000+ hours towards licensure) for a minimum  of 50 sessions while completing their degree in ICP/W. These 50 sessions must be accrued as follows:  
• A minimum of 20 sessions must be accrued before practicum approval. A signed Therapy  Verification form documenting these sessions must accompany the student’s application for  practicum approval. 
• A minimum of 30 sessions must be accrued during practicum. A signed Therapy Verification  form of these additional sessions must be provided with graduation clearance paperwork.  This therapy must be done with the same therapist, so please allow plenty of time to interview therapists  to ensure that you find someone you can commit to working with for the duration of your time in ICP/W.  Note: Any changes will require the approval of your faculty advisor and you are only allowed one change.  Your therapist must sign a Therapy Verification Form (available on the ICP/W SharePoint page) as proof  of completion of this requirement both before beginning practicum (proof of 20 completed sessions) and  again for graduation completion (proof of 30 additional completed sessions).  
Note: This requirement must be fully completed in order for you to receive your degree from CIIS. 
19 
Student Grievance Process 
While our faculty and staff go above and beyond to ensure that you have a positive, supportive  experience, there may be times when you are concerned and need to speak to someone about your  experience. In ICP/W, the student grievance process is as follows: 
1. If the concern is happening in class, speak to your instructor 
a. If you feel that your concern is not resolved at this stage, or your concerns are external to  the classroom, go to the next step. 
2. Speak to your faculty advisor 
a. Reach out by email to schedule an appointment with your faculty advisor, who will listen  to your concerns and may offer various university resources to assist you, such as the  Wellness Center, the Office of Student Accessibility Services, or Student Affairs (issues  such as bias, discrimination, or harassment are handled by Student Affairs). Because a  transformative program can elicit challenging emotions that may be difficult to sort out,  your advisor may also offer their own advice and suggestions depending on the situation.  However, if the situation is more serious, or your advisor cannot resolve it, move to the  next step. 
3. Contact one of the co-chairs (Sangeeta Swamy for ICP day students and Anna Bennasi for ICPW  weekend students) 
a. Co-chairs will listen to your concerns and may offer advice and/or consultation with  other parties in the university as necessary. If the situation is more serious and unable to  be resolved by your own actions, discussion with co-chairs, or through recommended university support services, you may choose to move onto the next step. 
4. File a formal grievance with Student Affairs outlined below:
  

20 
Other Course Related Information 
Class Attendance Policy 
Students are expected to attend all class meetings regularly and punctually. Students are assigned an F  (Failure) or NP (No Pass) grade if they are absent for more than 20 percent of a course. This maximum  includes both excused and unexcused absences. Three instances of tardiness or leaving early are  considered equivalent to one absence. Instructors may permit a student to deviate from this rule on the  grounds of illness necessitating confinement for 24 hours or more, a death in the family, or other extreme  emergencies. The instructor may request verification of these circumstances by a letter from a medical  professional, the Dean of Students, or the Academic Vice President as appropriate. Due to the nature of  some courses, individual programs, departments, and instructors may enforce stricter policies than these.  Check the program handbook and/or the syllabus of a course to see these policies. 
Course Syllabi 
ICP and ICPW course syllabi are posted to the ICP Program Page on Sharepoint/CIIS Connect, as well as  to Canvas course pages, at least two weeks before the start of each semester. Syllabi contain instructor  contact information, course meeting times, course assignments and reading lists. It is important that you  review course syllabi before the semester starts, since reading and other assignments may be due on the  first day of class.  
Course Readers 
Many instructors use Coursepacks or Readers —a bound collection of articles—in addition to or instead  of textbooks. Readers are available for purchase before the start of each semester. Details should be  included in your Course Syllabi and from the Akademos bookstore. You can also obtain information on  where to purchase readers from the course instructor. 
Electronic Reserves  
Some course reading material may be available on electronic reserve (ERes). All material on ERes is  password protected and is available from the CIIS Laurance S. Rockefeller Library website  (http://library.ciis.edu). If your instructors have placed course readings on ERes, they will indicate this on  their course syllabi and provide a password. 
Public Programs 
Public Programs (P3) offers a selection of workshops that can be taken as electives for academic credit.  They also offer special events and concerts at a discount to CIIS students. Please visit their website at  www.ciis.edu/publicprograms to view their offerings and check discount rates. Be sure to bring your  student ID to present at check in. Contact Public Programs staff by email at publicprograms@ciis.edu with questions. Workshops taken for academic credit will be charged the per unit rate.
21 
LPCC and LMFT Licensure 
Licensed Professional Clinical Counseling (LPCC) is a CA licensing option for master’s in counseling  degree graduates and is regulated by the Board of Behavioral Sciences as is the Licensed Marriage and  Family Therapist (LMFT) option. See the LPCC FAQ page in Sharepoint/CIIS Connect for more detailed  information. 
In California, the MFT and LPCC licenses operate in largely the same way. In other states, however,  different laws and regulations may govern how the MFT license and the LPCC license practice. Because  licensure requirements vary widely by state, it is essential that you research how different types of  licensed professionals practice in the state in which you live or plan to practice. 
LPCC’s must undergo additional coursework and additional practicum hours prior to graduation on topics  such as: career counseling, treatment of addiction, psychopharmacology and additional psychological  assessment. If you complete the LPCC track, you will be eligible for both the MFT and LPCC license in  California. 
The LPCC track requires these additional courses 
1. MCP 5023 Advanced Treatment of Addiction (2.00 unit) offered in the Fall 
2. MCP 6331 Psychological Assessment: Psychometric Theory (3.00 unit) offered in the Summer 3. MCP 5646 Career Counseling Theory and Practice for Therapists (3.00 unit) offered in the Spring 4. MCP 5109 Psychopharmacology (3.00 unit) offered in the Summer 
For LPCC licensure, 3 units of ethics is required. Based on the program you’re in, you may need this  additional ethics class. 
5. MCP 5651 CA Ethics and the Law (1.00 unit) offered in the Fall  
If you are declaring the LPCC track, work with your advisor in your 1st semester to plan your course  workload. Your program will have a curriculum map for you to follow, and you’ll add in the LPCC  coursework to the core MFT courses when they are offered. It’s important to work with your advisor so  that you have a plan in place to take these classes when they are offered since they are only offered one  time per year. Please see above to note when the LPPC track classes are scheduled. All LPCC courses are  offered online so as to accommodate all students, some of whom are distance students. 
The Board of Behavioral Sciences, or BBS, is the ultimate authority on licensing laws for the state of  California. It is important to become familiar with their website (www.bbs.ca.gov) as BBS requirements  change over time. It is also important to make a clear distinction between the Board of Behavioral  Sciences (BBS) educational requirements and ICP/W program requirements. The ICP/W programs are  designed to include all of the educational content that the licensing board requires in the master’s degree  program, as well as most of the other BBS requirements that must be completed prior to licensure.
22 
Graduate Level Writing 
Writing Guidelines 
The written components of the ICP Program have been designed to develop your ability to reflect on your  experience and gain knowledge and perspective about whatever you may encounter both in the program  and for the rest of your career. The writing components offer formats for you to digest the many  significant experiences you will encounter here, as well as further your capacities for openness,  flexibility, empathy, recognizing insights, making new connections, and engaging in deep critical thought.  Being able to express your ideas clearly and thoughtfully is an integral part of being fully present. 
You will be expected to write three kinds of papers in this program: Process or Self Reflection, Critical  Reflection and Theoretical or Research papers. Each instructor assigns papers slightly differently, but  students are expected to write graduate level, critical, reflective, and well-proofread papers.   
1. The Process or Self-Reflection Paper involves exploring your personal response to, and  understanding of, an experience that is relevant to your professional development. It expresses an  open and sincere investigation of your response to something or your patterns in the world,  looking for the potential roots of these patterns. These papers may include the larger contexts of  your strengths, your essence as well as your personality, personal histories or biases, the  developmental direction you may be going in, vulnerabilities, emotions, body sensations, and  other spiritual perspectives about how these patterns relate to something “larger” than yourself. 
2. The Theoretical or Research Paper usually involves combining theory and research from the  field’s academic and scholarly literature. It acknowledges and organizes the major previous  contributions to the topic while offering something new from your own perspective. It makes use  of established writers and experts to move an idea or viewpoint forward, and augments that with  your own cogent, well-supported by literature, and well- communicated conceptual arguments.  The purpose is to help you understand and interpret the literature of your profession throughout  your career, as well as to potentially contribute to it. 
3. The Critical Reflection Paper combines the above two, weaving theoretical concepts with  personal reflections or examples from people and situations you know, and demonstrates an  ability to view the concepts and your experience from multiple lenses and perspectives. In  contrast to the theoretical or research paper, your own ideas about and application of the concepts  are equally important to academic literature. Other details of this paper may vary between  instructors. 
The Center for Writing and Scholarship (CWS) is available for consultation any time you need writing  assistance during your time in the program. They offer free writing workshops and one-on-one tutoring  for students, and we encourage you to take advantage of their services. For more information, please visit  the CWS Program Page (https://ciisedu.sharepoint.com/sites/cws) or contact cws@ciis.edu
23 
Evaluation Thresholds 
We view your educational experience as extending from the classroom all the way through your everyday  interactions with fellow students, faculty, staff and administration. We invite you to join us in what we  hold as a psychospiritual educational community, in which all of us are practicing disciplines that support  both our own development and that of the larger group. These disciplines include taking responsibility for  and remaining curious about our own experience and relating to others with compassion, respect, and  constructive action. This can be somewhat challenging if you are feeling frightened, angry and/or  activated by situations, yet psychological and spiritual literature identify these experiences as vital for  professional, personal and spiritual growth. 
Starting with your first class and throughout your entire time in the program, you are asked to cultivate  and practice ways to compassionately share your truth while also carefully listening to, respecting, and  honoring the experience and perspectives of others (including students, faculty, staff and/or  administration).To help support this ongoing practice, CIIS has created a list of guiding community principles that students are expected to follow below. Note that these may be altered or added to by  faculty members at the beginning of each course: 
Step out of your comfort zone 
Use “I” statements 
Participate fully 
Ok to disagree 
Not ok to blame, shame, attack 
Both/and thinking 
Intent and impact 
Check out your assumptions 
Confidentiality 
Program Professionalism 
Given the experiential nature of the education you will receive in the ICP/ICPW Program, we understand  that that there will be moments of personal challenge that come along with the development of  psychospiritual and professional growth. We ask that you practice awareness, right/noble speech and  centeredness in your actions as you move through the program, practicing the utmost professionalism in  your interaction with fellow students, faculty, and staff. See the Professional Skills document in Appendix  D for more details. 
Evaluating your Progress 
Our program is experiential in nature and is designed to help you begin to embody the role of clinician  from day one in a supportive learning atmosphere. As you begin to practice, you will receive constructive  feedback from a variety of sources - your classmates, instructors, teaching assistants, and faculty advisors  as well as clinic directors and supervisors during practicum. We monitor students through all phases of  their education, evaluating their progress to ensure that they are building the skills needed to complete the  program and provide effective therapeutic service to the public. This feedback is provided in service of 
24 
your growth as a clinician. We hope that you will receive it in the spirit with which it is intended and  allow it to help you gain more awareness of both your strengths and areas that can be improved. Since  your faculty advisor serves as your main advocate and contact through this process, it is important to  check in with them regularly. 
There are currently 4 main thresholds for you to receive feedback on your progress and readiness for the  field (clinical skills evals, 2nd semester review, practicum approval and practicum evals), and a  professional skills form only used as needed. See the following pages for descriptions of each of these  processes. 
  

1. Clinical Skills Evaluations 
Clinical Skills Evaluations forms are filled out by instructors at the end of every pre-practicum  course that you take. These are designed to give you ongoing feedback in areas such as  professional conduct and skills particular to a specific course to help you prepare and gain  readiness for your practicum placements. See Appendix C for the exact form used. Your faculty  advisor will review these forms with you when you prepare your practicum application. Please  reach out to your advisor if you would like view these forms while preparing your practicum  application or at any time. 
2. 2nd Semester Review 
This review is completed collectively by ICP/W core faculty after students have completed their  first 2 semesters and evaluates student knowledge, clinical skills and personal and professional  skills and conduct in several areas and across all courses. This includes grades as well as personal  conduct and interactions with peers, faculty, and staff that are important in your development as a  professional. The purpose is to increase transparency and to let students know where they are on  track and if there are any areas that students need to address before the practicum approval  process in later semesters. 
25 
Students will be given one of four outcomes below: 
Green (Meets expectations) indicates that students are on track academically, professionally and  personally at this point, demonstrating conduct in alignment with ICP/W expectations of  professional conduct and skills. 
Gray (No outstanding concerns) indicates that there are no outstanding concerns, however, there  is a limited amount or no data on a student, for instance due to being a transfer student. 
Yellow (Requires attention) indicates that there are minor areas that need attention such as  missing paperwork, a 2 rating on clinical evaluation forms, or other similar issues. 
Red (Requires immediate attention) indicates that there is one or more serious areas that need  attention before students can proceed in the program, such as failing grades, academic probation,  disciplinary violations, multiple ratings of 1 on clinical evaluation forms, or other similar issues. 
Note that a green rating does not necessarily guarantee practicum approval in the future. Students  with a yellow or red rating will be given recommendations to support their development which  may include submitting required paperwork, retaking a class, attending therapy or additional  trainings, taking Clinical Lab, a required independent study, or additional measures. Students who receive a red rating and are unable to sufficiently demonstrate improvement will be given an  academic warning. If they are unable to meet requirements of the academic warning they will be  dismissed from the program. 
3. Practicum Approval Process 
At the beginning of the 3rd, 4th, or sometimes 5th or later semester, students will prepare a  practicum application (see the practicum application on Sharepoint and the practicum handbook  for more details) that outlines their learnings, strengths, areas of growth, countertransference and  other areas since the start of the program. Students should schedule a meeting with their faculty  advisor to review their application which will be presented to the entire faculty and staff during a  faculty meeting. Faculty will discuss students’ progress and strengths and any areas for  improvement, considering clinical evaluation forms, the 2nd semester review, reports from faculty  and staff and other available data. Students who demonstrate professional and personal readiness  for starting practicum will be approved to begin interviewing at practicum sites. See the  practicum handbook and the ICP/W Sharepoint pages for more details on this process. Given the  challenging nature of a transformative program, however, some students may need more time to  integrate their learnings and work through any challenges. These students will be given  recommendations and resources to increase their readiness for beginning practicum and  encouraged to apply in a later semester. Occasionally it may become apparent that the program or  the counseling field is not suitable for a particular student who will not be able to continue in the  program. These students may be given the opportunity to complete the program with a non clinical degree.
26 
4. Practicum Evaluations 
Once students have been accepted to a practicum site, supervisors will fill out evaluations each  semester where students will also receive ongoing feedback on their progress and areas of growth to continue their development as psychotherapists in training. See the practicum handbook for  more details.  
5. Professional Skills Form (as needed) (Appendix D) 
Outside of the previous thresholds, each instructor and practicum supervisor is required to  monitor and assess the student’s progress and to notify the student’s faculty advisor or the  Program Co-Chairs if they have any concerns about the student’s performance. When an instructor or supervisor is concerned about any part of a student’s work at any time and feels that  the program should be made aware of the concern, the following steps are to be followed: 
a. The instructor or supervisor discusses the concern with the student and  
attempts to resolve it. 
b. If it remains unresolved, the instructor or supervisor should contact the  
student’s faculty advisor or the Program Co-Chairs. 
c. The faculty advisor or the Program Co-Chairs discuss the concern with the  
student to attempt a resolution. 
d. If concern persists at this point, the concern is brought to the ICP Faculty and  Staff who will collectively fill out a Professional Skills Form. See Appendix D  
for this form. 
e. Students will be given a timeline of suggestions for improvement and/or  
required or recommended resources to follow up with. 
Academic Warnings and Dismissal 
With any of the thresholds, students who are unsuccessful in sufficiently demonstrating improvement or  meeting academic standards of the university, after repeated attempts and resources offered, will be given  an academic warning in writing. See details in the 2024-25 catalog for more details. If unable to  demonstrate required improvements after a warning, students may be dismissed from the program or a  offered a non-clinical degree. An exception is in the case of serious offense or disciplinary action, where  students may be dismissed from the program without an academic warning. Students may also initiate a  review as well, by contacting their faculty advisor, if they would like more feedback at any point in the  program. All threshold forms will be documented in student’s files in the department.
27 
Graduation Clearance 
Students must complete the following during their last semester of classes in order to graduate:  
Preparing for Graduation 
Be sure to attend a Graduation Workshop hosted by the Advising and Practicum Manager to review the  steps you need to take in order to prepare for graduation. 
Graduation Packet 
You must apply to graduate during your last semester. Go to the CIIS Academic Calendar at  https://www.ciis.edu/academics/academic-calendar for the Graduation Application Deadline for the  semester in which you plan to graduate. Check your emails from the Advising and Practicum Manager to  view the application deadlines and graduation clearance details.  
Therapy Verification Form 
Please have your therapist fill out this form then turn it into the Advising and Practicum Manager as soon  as you complete your required therapy sessions. Please make sure that 30 sessions take place within your  practicum year and only list the sessions that fall within that timeframe, and 20 sessions took place during  
the first few semesters of your degree program before you began practicum. This form can be found on  our Sharepoint site. 
Clinical Verification 
If you were placed at an ICP ICC, your clinical director must contact the Advising and Practicum Manager directly to verify that you have completed at least 225 practicum hours for the MFT Track or  280 for the LPCC Track, along with the case notes to go with them. If you were placed at an external site  please submit the appropriate BBS paperwork signed by your clinical supervisor to verify you have  completed at least 225 practicum hours for the MFT Track or 280 for the LPCC Track. See the practicum  handbook for more details. 
Confirm your Address  
Your official transcript and program certification will be sent to the address on file in Elucian approximately 2-3 weeks after the date grades are due. Please make sure it is correct and make changes if  needed to ensure timely delivery of these documents that you will need to apply for your BBS intern  number.  
Evaluation of Site & ICP Supervisor 
Please complete and turn in your ICP Supervisor and Practicum Site Evaluation form to the Advising and  Practicum Manager (see Sharepoint and/or the Practicum Handbook for these forms). This gives you a  chance to offer feedback about your experience at your site for the program.
28 
Financial Aid Loan Counseling Form 
If you received financial aid during your time at CIIS, you must log into the FAFSA website  (https://fafsa.ed.gov) and complete the Financial Aid Loan Counseling form. Please contact Financial Aid  directly at finaid@ciis.edu with questions or if you need additional support.  
Institution Research Survey 
All CIIS students are asked to complete this survey once they complete the program. Once you submit  your Graduation Application you will receive an email from the Registrar’s Office with instructions on  how to access the survey. We use this information to continue to refine and improve our program so we  greatly appreciate your feedback. 
Transcript Request 
Once you have completed all requirements for your degree, you must also submit a request to the  National Student Clearinghouse to have the Registrar submit an official transcript and program  certification to the BBS on your behalf, both of which are required parts of your associate application to  the BBS.  
Commencement Ceremony  
There is only one commencement ceremony each year at CIIS, which takes place in May. Students who  have completed everything but their last semester of practicum may walk in the ceremony. To participate  in the ceremony, you must complete your Graduation Application by the deadline noted in the Academic  Calendar during the spring semester. Students who graduate at the end of summer or fall semester will be  eligible to participate in the commencement ceremony the following year. The Office of Strategic  Communication and Relations is in charge of making arrangements for the ceremony. They will send you  an email with a Commencement Intent form for you to complete. If you have not received it by the end of  January after the semester you have graduated or have other questions about commencement, please  contact their office at oscr@ciis.edu. 
Register for BBS Intern Number 
In order to register for an associate number with the BBS, you must download the application packet from  their website at www.bbs.ca.gov and follow their instructions. To complete the application, you will need  an official transcript and program certification from CIIS. Please review pp. 41-42 for instructions on  obtaining those. Both documents must remain in sealed envelopes until they arrive at the BBS.
29 
ICP Program Advising    
Flow Chart 
Spring 2025 
Suggested flow of courses 
This is one pathway through the ICP program. ICP  recommends this sequence, but it is not required. Meet  with your Academic Advisor, Program Coordinator, or  the ICP Advising Manager to discuss alternatives. Not  every required course is offered every semester. 
1st Semester Spring 2025 
MCPI 5610 Therapeutic Communication (3) 
MCPI 6603 Multicultural Counseling and the Family (3) MCPI 5501 Psychodynamics (3) 
ICP 5619 Integral Yoga (1) 
2nd Semester Summer 2025 
ICP 5606 Gestalt (3) 
MCPI 5602 Clinical Relationship (3) OR 
MCPI xxxx Psychopathology* (3) 
MCP 5201 Human Development (3) 
3rd Semester Fall 2025 
MCPI 5615 Family Dynamics & Therapy (3) 
MCPI xxxx Psychopathology* (3) OR 
MCPI 5602 Clinical Relationship (3) 
MCPI 5604 Group Dynamics (3) 
MCP 5101 Ethics* (2) 
4th Semester Spring 2026 
Attend Practicum 101 Workshop (required). 
If eligible, apply for ICP practicum approval and then to  practicum sites for Summer or Fall start.  
ICP 6501 Transpersonal Psychotherapy (3) 
ICP 6830 Trauma (3) 
MCP 6102 Assessment and Treatment of Addictions (1)  MCP 5101 Ethics* (2) (if not previously taken) 
5th Semester Summer 2026 
Practicum – Group Supervision (2) (might begin)  MCP 6502 Child Therapy (2) 
MCPI 6601 Couples Counseling (3) 
6th Semester Fall 2026 
Practicum– Group Supervision if first semester  otherwise Individual Supervision (2) 
MCP 6233 Intro to CMH & Recovery Model (2)  MCPI xxxx Research Methods (3) 
MCP 6101 Human Sexuality (1) 
ICP 5621 Cognitive Behavioral  
Therapy (1) 
7th Semester Spring 2027 
Practicum – Individual Supervision (2) 
General Electives (3 units total; can be  
taken at any time during the program) 
ICP 7702 Integrative Seminar (3) (if began  Practicum Summer 2024) 
8th Semester Summer 2027 
Practicum – Individual Supervision (2)  
ICP 7702 Integrative Seminar (3) 
LPCC Track Courses —Additional 12 units,  replacing 2 units of electives 
MCP 5646 Career Counseling Theory &  Practice for Therapists (3) 
MCP 6331 Psychological Assessment:  
Psychometric Theory (3) 
MCP 5651 CA Ethics and the Law (1)  
MCP 5109 Psychopharmacology (3) 
MCP 5023 Advanced Treatment of Addictions (2) 
Decide by the end of your first year if you will pursue  the LPCC track. Substitute your 2 units of general  elective for these courses. 280 hours of FTF Client  Contact is required for graduation. 
Practicum Readiness Checklist: 
(Details and Forms available on ICP/W SharePoint  practicum pages) 
Attend Practicum 101 & 102 Workshops (required) 
Complete 20 hours of personal therapy prior to applyingfor  practicum approval (complete 30 additional sessions  during practicum) 
Complete all pre-practicum courses prior to applying for  practicum. Note: MCP 5108 Psychopathology and MCP 5101  Ethics can be taken concurrently while applying for practicum. 
Turn in “ICP Application for Practicum Approval” and  receive approval from ICP Practicum Committee See Fall  or Spring ICP Practicum Calendar for Faculty Committee  Review dates 
External Practicum: Visit field placement office for  
external practicum site info and apply to external sites (5  sites minimum) 
ICCs Practicum: Attend the open house at each ICC and a  complete application for each ICC you plan to apply to. You can  attend the Open Houses in the semester before you plan to apply 
ICCs Practicum: Attend large and small group  
interview(s) at sites 
ICCs Practicum: Receive notification about admission to  the site 
Attend Practicum 102 Workshop (required) upon  
confirming site placement (ICC or external site) 
Register for supervision/practicum course each  
semester: Group Supervision class first semester,  
Individual Supervision course via Individual Supervision  Registration Form in 2nd and 3rd semesters 
For Individual Supervision, select an ICP supervisor and  arrange meetings. Use the Supervision Calendar of your  individual supervision practicum semester 
Submit completed and signed Supervised  
Fieldwork Agreement (SFWA) to MCP Field  
Placement 
Complete BBS paperwork with placement site 
Complete 50 hours of personal therapy (20 sessions prior to  beginning practicum) 
Complete 6 units of practicum coursework
Appendix C 
California Institute of Integral Studies 
1453 Mission Street, San Francisco, CA 94103 - (415) 575-6117 - Fax (415) 575-1264 
ICP Faculty Evaluation of Student’s Clinical Skills 
Please use this form to evaluate the student’s clinical skills or conduct, according to the given goals and objectives  of your class or the situation. Please submit this form for each student at the end of the semester to the ICP  Advising and Supervision Manager online.
Identifying information
	Student name 
	

	Faculty or  
Administrator name
	

	Class/situation 
	

	Semester & Year
	

	



RATING
	1 
	Serious difficulty with performance 
	2 
	Needs improvement
	3 
	Performs as expected at this level 
	4 
	Performs above expectations
	



Rubric for Therapeutic Com., Clinical Rel., Multicultural, and Gestalt only
	Able to create a working therapeutic relationship 
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to demonstrate and communicate empathy and compassion 
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to attune to the needs and therapeutic objectives of client
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to set and maintain clear boundaries with client
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to effectively apply therapeutic interventions
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to demonstrate multicultural awareness and competence
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to participate and contribute as part of a group
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to reflect on personal process and countertransference with self awareness
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to take in feedback non-defensively 
	1 2 3 4 
	Rubric for Psychopathology class only
	Able to create case conceptualization and treatment plan/goals
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to diagnose accurately using the DSM
	 1 2 3 4 
	Rubric for Human Development class only
	Able to apply human development concepts well to life situations 
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to demonstrate awareness, insight, and maturity regarding one’s own  developmental process
	 1 2 3 4 
	



33 
Rubric for Family Dynamics class only
	Able to understand key family dynamics concepts and how they affect one’s  own life 
	 1 2 3 4 
	Able to apply key family therapy concepts to working competently with a  family
	 1 2 3 4 
	Rubric for Clinical Lab only
	Demonstrated marked improvement on clinical skills by the end of course 
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to demonstrate and communicate empathy and compassion 
	1 2 3 4 
	Able to take in feedback non-defensively 
	1 2 3 4 
	Student is ready for practicum (scoring 3 and yes, 2 and below no) 
	1 2 3 4 
	



Please see reverse side for General Program Professional Conduct Rubric and Comments Section 
Rubric for General Program Professional Conduct – all courses
	

	Able to treat others professionally and appropriately, even while experiencing an  emotional charge (e.g. anger, resentment, disappointment, fear)
	□Yes □ No
	Able to hold realistic, proportional expectations in situations, with minimal  influence of entitlement or personal issues.
	□ Yes □ No
	Able to be open to seeing what is positive, valuable, and well-intended in  situations which one experiences as disappointing or upsetting.
	□Yes □ No
	Able to recognize that one’s own experience is just one viewpoint, and to remain  open to alternate perspectives and realities.
	□ Yes □ No
	Able to gauge the likely limits of one’s knowledge and experience, and recognize  when another is likely to know more.
	□Yes □ No
	Able to be focused, attentive, present, and engaged in class, even when less  satisfied with the experience.
	□Yes □ No
	If you checked “NO” for any of the above General Program Professional Conduct items,  please explain below.
	



Comments
	

	Suggestions for student's Professional Growth Plan (areas that need further development): 
	



34 
Appendix D  
Professional Skills Form                                                Name and date:  
Professional Skills
	Punctuality and Readiness 
	1       2        3        4         
	Notetaking and Records 
	1       2        3        4       
	Collaboration, Supervision and Consultation 
	1       2        3        4     
	Communication and Self-Regulation 
	1       2        3        4         
	Listening, Empathy and Memory 
	1       2        3        4         
	Critical thinking, Numeracy, Literature 
	1       2       3        4         
	Hygiene, Dress and Atmosphere 
	1        2        3        4
	Comments:
	

	Recommended plan:
	

	Student signature: 
Advisor signature: 
Chair signature:
	Date: 
Date: 
Date:
	



 
See below for more details and explanation of each skill.  
Punctuality and Readiness:   
o Punctuality to class and all training obligations, meetings, and appointments.  o Communicating any lateness as soon as possible, explaining their circumstances in a  professional manner.  
o Arrive ready to participate, self-regulated, have the required materials, rested, taken  care of their own needs prior to arriving,  addressed any other distractions, and are  poised to begin. 
o Take the responsibility to maintain contact information in order to reach others  when needed (e.g. faculty, supervisors and clients) during missed, critical incidents  or emergencies.   
35 
o Address issues up front and intentionally, and demonstrate dependability in  communications and reliability.    
Notetaking and Records: 
o Because the profession requires accurate and timely professional notetaking, we  evaluate students’ capacity to keep and store important documents prior to  graduation as a proxy for these skills.   
o Take complete responsibility for maintaining accurate Board of Behavioral Sciences  (BBS) and Board of Psychology (BOP) notes and records such as hours logs and  copies of important documents associated with licensure application (e.g.  supervisor agreements, recommendations, transcripts).   
o Complete all written documentation related to clinical work in accordance with the  timelines set by the clinical site.  This includes clinical notes.  
Collaboration, Supervision and Consultation 
o Understand their scope of practice, ethical responsibility and level of competency.    o Consult with licensed practitioners and supervisors with an open-minded stance  and take in the feedback of these supervisors.   
o Make supervisors aware of potential liabilities and ethical issues that are unfolding  with client work as a measure of developing clinical judgment. 
o Maintain an open and collaborative approach to supervision.  While it is not  uncommon for differences in perspective to arise between supervisors and trainees,  therapists in training  
o Use dynamic tensions in supervision constructively to explore differences to hone  clinical judgment and develop.  
o In challenging situations, honor the judgment of the licensed professional under  whom students practice, while they are in training. 
o In the event there is a conflict between supervisor and student, faculty and student,  student and student, or student and staff during the program, follow CIIS  institutional policies and processes as stated in the program handbook and training  manuals.  This includes discussions with the program advisor, program chair or  clinic Director, Dean of Students and Provost in that order. 
Communication and Self-Regulation Skills: 
o Maintain professional boundaries with clients and other professionals in their  interactions.   
o Demonstrate congruence between non-verbal and verbal behavior o Be fully present with others and have openness for feedback in training and  academic work.  
o Communicates constructively in the classroom, engaging authentically, honestly,  and thoughtfully with in-class discussions as well as written assignments o Communicate using professionalism and self-regulation even when clients or others  are dysregulated, tangential or labile, have uncommon ways to express themselves,  or struggle with cognition and or behavior in these areas. 
36 
o Use intentionality and discernment as a means of supporting collaborative  engagement with a broad range of clients, honoring sociocultural differences and  personal preferences that come to bear on these dimensions of engagement, such as  tone of voice, eye contact, embodied navigation of spaces, verbal and nonverbal  communication 
o Manage any mental health or physical health conditions in order to maintain  effective and professional work relationships with others.    
o In the instance that a mental or physical health condition arises that interferes with  the therapist in training’s ability to conduct themselves according to these  standards, or to effectively serve clients to the standards of the clinical setting,  proactively seek support, consultation, and potentially be released from duties so  that such conditions can be addressed satisfactorily.  
o Manage and explore transference and countertransference professionally through  supervision and self-reflection.  This includes understanding and managing  defenses, triggers, trauma responses, erotic, aggressive, and avoidant feelings and  impulses, as well as fantasies. 
o Demonstrate the capacity to regulate their emotions and engage in effective  interpersonal and social communication with others including peers, staff, faculty  and supervisors as well as the public. 
o Understand the impact they have on others and take this impact into consideration  in their behaviors in service of collaborative engagement with others. o Raise any concerns or serious issues professionally and within the formal channels.   Should these channels fail to meet their needs, they may choose to escalate these  concerns professionally and in a self-regulated manner first to their advisor or the  Department chair or Clinic Director (if the issue pertains to the practicum  experience) and then to the Dean of Students and the Provost.   
o Follows the APA Code of Ethics in all interactions with students, staff, faculty, and  others  
Listening, Empathy and Memory 
o Consider and value multiple points of view. 
o Track what others have said with reasonable accuracy as it relates to a clinical  dialogue and supervisory dialogue.  
o Demonstrate flexibility and empathy in the clinical and supervisory relationship  o Make meaning from others’ narratives in a way that does not diminish the value of  other people.    
o Recognize and support the sociocultural beliefs, worldviews, values, languages,  behaviors and communication styles of others. 
o Demonstrate remorse for any transgressions and a willingness to repair ruptures
37 
Critical Thinking, Numeracy, Literacy 
o Manage hours logs, fees and other important numeric tasks accurately and  professionally in a timely manner. 
o Seek support and accommodations when needed  
o Integrate alternative conceptualizations and consider adjunct therapies,  interpretations and solutions when necessary, and seek supervision to consider  these ideas and to help hone this capacity from licensed others. 
Hygiene, Dress and Atmosphere 
o Develop a professional presentation that supports the therapeutic endeavor  o Maintain a reasonable level of hygiene and avoid excessive scents and strong smelling food in clinical spaces.   
o Avoid the use of cell phones during sessions except in emergencies.   o Provide a clean and comfortable setting for psychotherapy. 
o Learn the safety protocols associated with the space they are practicing in (e.g.  earthquake and power outages, evacuation protocols, security protocols). o Not be under the influence of drugs and alcohol in any clinical, supervisory, or  educational setting. In the age of psychedelic assisted therapy,  make sure that any  prescribed clinically tracked journeys do not coincide with attendance in school or  at practicum.
38